GUIDE TO THE
 

BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT
 
(Includes Amendments through January 1, 2017)
 

Prepared by: 

DIVISION OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
 
Department of Consumer Affairs
 
1625 N. Market Blvd., Suite S 309 

Sacramento, CA 95834
 
(916) 574-8220
 

This document may be copied if all of the following conditions are met:  the 
meaning of the copied text is not changed; credit is given to the Department of 
Consumer Affairs; and all copies are distributed free of charge. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page(s) 

1 

2-4 
2 
2-3
 
3-4
 

BAGLEY-KEEN OPEN MEETING ACT 

Table of Contents 

Subject 

Public Policy to Conduct People’s Business Openly 

Board, Committee, Subcommittee, Task Force Meetings 
A.  Definition of a “Meeting” 
B.  Exemptions from Definition of Meeting 
C.  Board and Committee Meetings 

I. 

II. 

III. 

Types of Meetings; Purpose; Notice; Other Requirements 
A. Regularly Scheduled Meetings 

1. Who May Hold a Regularly Scheduled Meeting 
2. Purposes for Which the Meeting May be Held 
3. Notice Requirements for a Regularly Scheduled Meeting 

4-11
 
4-8
 
4
 
4
 
5-7
 
5-7
 
a. Board Meetings 
8
 
b. Committee, Subcommittee or Task Force Meetings 
4. Specific Requirements for Regularly-Scheduled Meeting 
8
 
5. Specific Prohibitions on Holding a Regularly-Scheduled Meeting  8
 

B. “Special” Meetings 

1. Who May Hold a Special Meeting 
2. Purpose for Which a Special Meeting May be Held 
3. Notice Requirements for a Special Meeting 
4. Specific Requirements During Special Meetings 
5. Specific Prohibitions on Holding a Special Meeting 

C. “Emergency” Meetings 

1. Who May Hold an Emergency Meeting 
2. Purposes for Which an Emergency Meeting May be Held 
3. Notice Requirements for an Emergency Meeting 
4. Specific Requirements for an Emergency Meeting 
5. Specific Prohibitions on Holding an Emergency Meeting 

IV. 

Closed Sessions 
A. Purposes for Which Closed Session Can be Held 

1. Personnel Matters 
2. Examination Matters 
3. Matters Affecting Individual Privacy 
4. Administrative Disciplinary Matters 
5. Board of Accountancy Matters 
6. Pending Litigation 
7. Response to Confidential Final Draft Audit Report 
8. Threat of Criminal or Terrorist Activity 
9. Advisory Bodies/Committees May Meet in Closed Session 

10. Open Session Otherwise Required 

8-10
 
8
 
8-9
 
9-10
 
10
 
10
 
10-11
 
10
 
10
 
11
 
11
 
11
 

11-18
 
11-16
 
12
 
12
 
13 
13-14 
14 
14 
14 
15 
15 
15 

Rev. 1/17 

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
       
 
     
 
 
 
 
       
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
         
 
   
       
 
     
 
       
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
       
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
   
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
  
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
                
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
     
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
     
 
              
 
  
 
 
 
     
B. Notice and Reporting Requirements for Closed Sessions 

1. Notice of Closed Session 
2. Reporting After A Closed Session 

C. Other Procedural Requirements for Closed Sessions 

V. 

Meeting by Teleconferencing 

VI. 

Deliberations and Voting 
A. Seriatim Calls to Individual Agency Members Prohibited 
B. E-Email Prohibition 
C. Secret Ballot Prohibited 
D. Voting by Proxy Prohibited 
E. Use of Electronic Devices During Meeting 
F. Voting by Mail on Administrative Disciplinary Matters 
G. Recording and Reporting Votes 

VII.  Miscellaneous Provisions 

A. Conforming Board Member’s Conduct 
B. Providing Open Meeting Act to New Board Members 
C. Prohibition on Placing Conditions on Public’s Attendance 

1. Sign-in 
 2. Discrimination in Admittance to Meeting Facility 
3. Access for the Disabled 
4. Charging a Fee or Requiring a Purchase for Access 

D. Agency Recording of the Proceedings 
E. Public’s Right to Record the Proceedings 
F. Media Broadcast of the Proceedings 
G. Webcasting 
H. Taking Agenda Items Out of Order 
I.

 Opportunity for Public Comment at Meetings 

VIII.  Disclosure of Documents 

A. Documents Distributed Prior to the Meeting 
B. Documents Distributed During the Meeting 
C. Charging a Fee for Public Documents 

IX. 

Penalties 

15-16
 
15-16 
16 
16-17 

17-18 

19-21 
19 
19-20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
21
 
21-22
 

21-23
 
21
 
21
 
21-22
 
21

22
 
22
 
22
 
22
 
22
 
22
 
22
 
23
 
23
 

24
 
24
 
24
 
24
 

24-25
 

Rev. 1/17 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
     
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
               
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GUIDE TO THE
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT
 
(Includes Amendments through January 1, 2017)
 

This guide is an update on the provisions of the public meetings law governing state 

agencies, officially called the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act.  (Article 9 (commencing with 
Section 11120), Chapter 1, Part 1, Division 3, Title 2 of the Government Code).  The Open 
Meeting Act closely parallels the Ralph M. Brown Act, which governs meetings of local 
government agencies.  This guide includes all statutory changes through January 1, 2017. 
Please disregard all previous Guides to the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act (distributed 
prior to January 15, 2017) on this subject.  

All statutory references are to the Government Code. 

I.  PUBLIC POLICY TO CONDUCT PEOPLE’S BUSINESS OPENLY 

Section 11120 sets forth the purpose of the law: 

"It is the public policy of this state that public agencies exist to aid in the conduct 
of the people's business and the proceedings of public agencies be conducted 
openly so that the public may remain informed. 

In enacting this article the Legislature finds and declares that it is the intent of 
the law that actions of state agencies be taken openly and that their deliberation 
be conducted openly. 

The people of this state do not yield their sovereignty to the agencies which 
serve them.  The people, in delegating authority, do not give their public 
servants the right to decide what is good for the people to know and what is not 
good for them to know.  The people insist on remaining informed so that they 
may retain control over the instruments they have created. 

This article shall be known and may be cited as the Bagley-Keene Open
 
Meeting Act."
 

Each board has essentially three duties under the Open Meeting Act.  First, to give 

timely and sufficient public notice of meetings to be held.  Second, to provide an opportunity 
for public comment.  Third, to conduct such meetings in open session, except where a closed 
session is specifically authorized. We use the terms “agency” and “board” to mean not only 
boards, but also commissions and any examining committees or boards within the jurisdiction 
of the Medical Board of California. 

Section 11121 defines the “state body” that is subject to the Bagley Keene Act. 
Unless specifically excluded by statute, a “state body” is defined as a state board, 

commission or similar multimember body of the state that is created by statute or required by 
law to conduct official meetings and every commission created by executive order; or a 

Rev. 1/17 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
board, commission committee or similar multimember body that exercises any authority, 
delegated to it by that state body; or an advisory commission, an advisory board, advisory 
committee, advisory subcommittee or similar multimember advisory body of a state  body, if 
created by formal action of the state body or any member of the state body , and if the 
advisory body so created, consists of three or more persons.  Effective April 1, 2016, the 
definition of “state body” was amended to include the State Bar of California, as described in 
Section 6001 of the Business and Professions Code.  Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of 
section 11121.1, amended effective April 1, 2016, the State Bar is subject to the Bagley-
Keene Open Meeting Act and the California Public Records Act.  (§ 11121(e)) 

II. 	 BOARD, COMMITTEE, SUBCOMMITTEE, TASK FORCE MEETINGS 

A.	

	 Definition of a “Meeting” 

“Meeting" is defined in the Act as including “any congregation of a majority of the 
members of a state body at the same time and place to hear, discuss, or deliberate upon any 
item that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the state body to which it pertains." 
(§11122.5(a))  The law now prohibits use by a majority of the members of a state body of 
direct communications or a series of communications of any kind, directly or through personal 
intermediaries, or technological devices (such as e-mails) to discuss, deliberate, or take 
action on any item of business that is within the subject matter of the state body. 
(§11122.5(b) (1). 

B. 	 Exemptions from Definition of Meeting 

The law recognizes that not all gatherings of a majority of members of a state body at 
a single location constitute a meeting.  Current law provides that the provisions of the Act do 
not apply to the following situations, provided that "a majority of the members do not discuss 
among themselves, other than as part of a scheduled program, business of a specified nature 
that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the state body."  (§11122.5(c)) 

	 

Individual contacts or conversations between a member of a state body and any other 
person.  (§11122.5(c)(1)) 

	  Attendance by a majority of members at a conference or similar gathering open to the 
public that involves a discussion of issues of general interest to the public or to public 
agencies of the type represented by the state body.  (§11122.5(c)(2)) 

	  Attendance by a majority of members at an open and publicized meeting organized to 
address a topic of state concern by a person or organization other than the state body. 
(§11122.5(c)(3)) 

	  Attendance by a majority of members at an open and noticed meeting of another state 

body or of a legislative body of a local agency.  (§11122.5(c)(4)) 

	  Attendance by a majority of members at a purely social or ceremonial occasion. 


(§11122.5(c)(5))
 

Rev. 1/17 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	  Attendance by a majority of members at an open and noticed meeting of a standing 
committee of that body, provided the members of the body who are not members of 
the committee attend only as observers.  (§11122.5(c)(6)) 

The law does not, however, prevent an employee or official of a state agency from 
engaging in separate communications outside of a noticed meeting with members of the 
legislature to answer questions or provide information about a matter within the agency’s 
subject matter jurisdiction – with the limitation that the person cannot communicate to 
members of the legislative body, the comments or position of any other member of the 
legislative body. (§11122.5(b)(2)) 

C. 	 Board and Committee Meetings 

There are two basic types of meetings held by agencies in the Department of 
Consumer Affairs.  The first type is a board meeting, where a quorum of the members of the 
board is present.  The second type is a committee meeting consisting of less than a quorum 
of the members of the full board.  Subcommittee and task force meetings are variations of 
committee meetings. 

Board meetings have historically been required to be noticed and open to the public, 

except where a closed session is authorized.  Committee and subcommittee meetings, where 
less than a quorum of the board is present, are also required to be noticed and open to the 
public.  The only exception is for a committee that consists of fewer than three persons and 
does not exercise any authority of a state body delegated to it by that state body.  (NOTE – it 
is the number of persons on the committee [not the number of board members] that is 
determinative.) 

Where a committee of fewer than three persons is to meet, and the meeting is not 
noticed, other members of the board should not attend the meeting, as such attendance 
would clearly be perceived as an Open Meeting Act violation.  Board staff is not precluded 
from attending such a meeting. 

[Restriction on Attendance at Committee Meetings]  The law allows attendance by 
a majority of members at an open and noticed meeting of a standing committee of the board, 
provided the members of the board who are not members of the committee attend only as 
observers.  (§11122.5(c)(6))  The Office of the Attorney General has addressed in a formal 
opinion a provision in the Brown Act relating to the attendance of "observers" at a committee 
meeting.  The Attorney General concluded that "[m]embers of the legislative body of a local 
public agency may not ask questions or make statements while attending a meeting of a 
standing committee of the legislative body 'as observers.'"  The opinion further concluded that 
such members of the legislative body may not sit in special chairs on the dais with the 
committee.  (81 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 156) 

Rev. 1/17 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, under the provisions of section 11122.5(c)(6), and the opinion of the California 

Attorney General, if a majority of members of the full board are present at a committee 
meeting, members who are not members of the committee that is meeting may attend that 
meeting only as observers.  The board members who are not committee members may not 
sit on the dais with the committee, and may not participate in the meeting by making 
statements or asking questions. 

If a board schedules its committee meetings seriatim, and other board members are 

typically present to ultimately be available for their own committee meeting, your notice of the 
committee meeting should contain a statement to the effect that “Members of the board who 
are not members of this committee may be attending the meeting only as observers.” 

Subcommittees may be appointed to study and report back to a committee or the 
board on a particular issue or issues.  If the subcommittee consists of three or more persons, 
the same provisions apply to its meetings as apply to meetings of committees. 

Board chairpersons may occasionally appoint a task force to study and report on a 
particular issue.  One or two board members typically serve as task force members, along 
with a number of other non-board members.  When this is the case, the same Open Meeting 
Act rules that apply to committee meetings apply to task force meetings. Such a formally 
appointed task force falls under the definition of “state body” in Section 11121(c).” 

III.  TYPES OF MEETINGS; PURPOSE; NOTICE; OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Boards and committees may hold several types of meetings, including a regularly 

scheduled meeting, a “special” meeting, or an “emergency” meeting under the provisions of 
section 11125.5.  This section of the memorandum addresses who can hold certain types of 
meetings, the purposes for which the meetings can be held, notice requirements, and any 
other special requirements or prohibitions. 

A.  Regularly Scheduled Meetings 

1.  Who May Hold a Regularly Scheduled Meeting 

A board, committee, subcommittee, or task force may hold a regularly scheduled 

meeting.  These are the business meetings that are scheduled throughout the year to 
conduct the usual and customary business of the board.  Such meetings may generally be 
called by the chairperson, or by a majority of the body.  However, you must refer to your 
particular licensing act, which may contain different provisions as to who may call a meeting. 

2.  Purposes for Which the Meeting May be Held 

These meetings are to conduct the usual and customary business of the board, or the 
business of a committee, subcommittee or task force as directed by the board.  The subject 
matter of the meetings is essentially dictated by the jurisdiction of the board as found in the 
board’s licensing act.  There are no statutory restrictions in the Open Meeting Act on the 
purposes for which a regularly scheduled meeting may be held. 

Rev. 1/17 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3.  Notice Requirements for a Regularly Scheduled Meeting 

a.  Board Meetings 

An agency is required to give at least 10 calendar days written notice of each board 

meeting to be held.  (§11125(a).)  Effective January 1, 2015, an agency is authorized to 
provide that notice by regular mail, email or both. However, that same section requires an 
agency to give a person requesting notice the option of receiving the notice by regular mail, 
email or both and the agency must comply with that requester’s choice for receiving notice of 
meetings.  (Business and Professions Code section 101.7) The notice must include the 
name, address, and telephone number of a person who can provide further information prior 
to the meeting and must contain the website address where the notice can be accessed.  The 
notice must also be posted on the Internet at least 10 calendar days before the meeting. 

In addition to the website posting, effective January 1, 2003, the notice is required to 

be made available in appropriate alternate formats upon request by any person with a 
disability. 

The notice of each board meeting must include an agenda that is prepared for the 

meeting.  The agenda must include all items of business to be transacted or discussed at the 
meeting.  " ...  A brief general description of an item generally need not exceed 20 words.  ... 
No item shall be added to the agenda subsequent to the provision of this notice." 
(§11125(b))  This provision does not, however, preclude amending an agenda provided the 
amended notice is distributed and posted on the Internet at least 10 calendar days prior to 
the meeting. Effective January 1, 2003, the notice must include information that would enable 
a person with a disability to know how, to whom, and by when a request may be made for 
any disability-related modification or accommodation, including auxiliary aids or services. 
(§11125(f))  We suggest the following as standard language: 

The meeting is accessible to the physically disabled. A person who
 
needs a disability-related accommodation or modification in order to
 
participate in the meeting may make a request by contacting
 
____________ at (916) __________ or sending a written request to that 

person at the Board  [Address], Sacramento, California, [zip code].
 
Providing your request at least five (5) business days before the meeting
 
will help ensure availability of the requested accommodation.
 

The definition of "action taken" in Section 11122 is of some aid in determining what the 
Legislature intended by use of the words "items of business to be transacted." 

"11122.  As used in this article 'action taken' means a collective decision made 
by the members of a state body, a collective commitment or promise by the 
members of the state body to make a positive or negative decision or an actual 
vote by the members of a state body when sitting as a body or entity upon a 
motion, proposal, resolution, order or similar action." 

Rev. 1/17 

5 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General agenda items such as "New Business," "Old Business," "Executive Officer's 

Report," "Committee Reports," "President's Report," "Miscellaneous," etc., without specifying 
the particular matters thereunder, lack sufficient specificity to meet the standards of the Open 
Meeting Act and cannot be used to circumvent the notice requirement of a specific agenda. 
The Office of the Attorney General has opined that: 

"... the purpose of subdivision (b) [of Government Code Section 11125] is to 
provide advance information to interested members of the public concerning the 
state body's anticipated business in order that they may attend the meeting or 
take whatever other action they deem appropriate under the circumstances. 

*  *  * 

"We believe that Section 11125 was and is intended to nullify the need for . . . 
guesswork or further inquiry on the part of the interested public."  (67 
Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 85, 87) 

Items not included on the agenda may not be acted on or discussed, even if no action 

is to be taken by the agency.  However, we offer two suggestions so members of the public 
and board members may raise issues that are not on the agenda. 

We strongly encourage boards to include an item on their agendas for "Public 
Comment on Matters Not on the Agenda."  This gives persons who are attending a meeting 
an opportunity to raise any issues they may have, which may not be on the agenda, but 
which may be appropriate for future board discussion.  Matters raised under this agenda item 
should be discussed only to the extent necessary to determine whether they should be made 
an agenda item at a future meeting.  (§11125.7(a)) 

It must be reiterated that no action may be taken on any such item and discussion is 

limited to that which is necessary to make the determination as to whether the item will be 
added to a future board agenda. 

While neither the California Victim Compensation Board nor the Government Claims 

Board are within the Department of Consumer Affairs, any hearing conducted by either of 
these boards, pursuant to Section 13963.1 and neither representative requests the hearing 
be open to the public, the notice, agenda, announcement or report need not identify the 
applicant. (§11125.8) 

We also strongly encourage boards to include an item on their agenda for "Agenda 

Items for Future Meetings."  This allows all board members an opportunity to request specific 
agenda items for a meeting.  Again, these items should be discussed only to the extent 
necessary to determine whether they should be included as agenda items for a future 
meeting. 

[CAVEAT:  If the regularly scheduled meeting will have a closed session agenda 
item or items, or be held by teleconference, please refer to the discussion of additional 
requirements under those headings, below.] 

Rev. 1/17 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The notice and the agenda must be provided to any person who requests it.  A 
member of the public may request notice for a specific meeting, for all meetings at which a 
particular subject will be discussed or action taken thereon, or for all meetings of the agency. 
Mailing lists of persons who desire to be notified of more than one meeting must be 
maintained pursuant to Section 14911, which provides: 

"14911.  Whenever any state agency maintains a mailing list of public officials 
or other persons to whom publications or other printed matter is sent without 
charge, the state agency shall correct its mailing list and verify its accuracy at 
least once each year.  This shall be done by addressing an appropriate 
postcard or letter to each person on the mailing list.  The name of any person 
who does not respond to such letter or postcard, or who indicates that he does 
not desire to receive such publications or printed matter, shall be removed from 
the mailing lists.  The response of those desiring to be on the mailing list shall 
be retained by these agencies for one year." 

Effective 1/1/98, a sentence was added to subdivision (c) of Section 11125.1 to state 

that “Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a state body to place any paid 
advertisement or any other paid notice in any publication.”  (Stats. 1997, Chapt. 949; SB 95) 
The Legal Office interprets this provision to supersede any provisions in particular practice 
acts which require newspaper publication of board or committee meetings.  Boards and 
committees, of course, retain the discretion to publish notices in newspapers if they so 
choose. 

b.  Committee, Subcommittee or Task Force Meetings 

Each agency is required to give notice of committee, subcommittee or task force 

(“committee”) meetings to be held.  However, this requirement does not apply if the 
committee consists of less than three persons. It is the number of persons on the committee 
that is determinative, not how many of the persons are board members.  Thus, if a committee 
consisted of two board members and two other interested persons, its meetings would have 
to meet all the requirements of the Open Meeting Act. 

Notice of committee meetings must be provided and posted on the Internet at least 10 

calendar days in advance of the meeting.  (§11125(a)) The notice "shall include a brief, 
general description of the business to be transacted or discussed, and no item shall be added 
subsequent to the provision of the notice."  (§11125(c))  The notice must also include the 
Website address where the notice can be accessed on the Internet.  Although the law does 
not so specify, we would suggest also including in the notice the name, address, and 
telephone number of a contact person who can provide further information prior to the 
meeting.  As with board meetings, there is no requirement that the notice be published in any 
newspaper or other periodical.  However, the notice must be provided to any person or 
persons who have requested to be notified of the particular committee's meetings. Effective 
January 1, 2015, an agency is authorized to provide that notice by regular mail, email or both. 
However, that same section requires an agency to give a person requesting notice the option 
of receiving the notice by regular mail, email or both and the agency must comply with that 
requester’s choice for receiving notice of meetings.  (Business and Professions Code section 
101.7)  You may elect to send such notice to those persons on your regular mailing list. 

Rev. 1/17 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remember, you must post your notice on the Internet at least 10 calendar days in 

advance of the meeting and must make the notice available in appropriate alternate formats 
upon request by any person with a disability. 

Provision is made for certain non-emergency, but sometimes necessary, committee 

meetings.  Where, during the course of a regularly scheduled and properly noticed board 
meeting, the board desires that a committee presently discuss an item of business on the 
agenda, the committee may do so provided (a) the specific time and place of the committee 
meeting is announced during the public meeting of the board, and (b) the committee meeting 
is conducted within a reasonable time of, and nearby, the meeting of the board.  (§11125(c)) 

4.  Specific Requirements for Regularly-Scheduled Meetings 

There are no specific requirements, other than those set forth above, for regularly 

scheduled board, committee, subcommittee or task force meetings. 

5.  Specific Prohibitions on Holding a Regularly-Scheduled Meeting 

There are no statutory prohibitions in the Open Meeting Act on a board, committee, 

subcommittee or task force conducting a regularly scheduled meeting. 

We again remind you that, with respect to committee meetings, members of the board 

who are not members of the committee that is meeting may only attend the committee 
meeting as observers.  This means these members may not sit on the dais with the 
committee, make any statements, or ask any questions during the committee meeting.  (81 
Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 156) 

B.  “Special” Meetings 

SB 95 of 1997 created a new category of meeting, identified as a “special” meeting. 

1.  Who May Hold a Special Meeting 

A board, committee, subcommittee or task force may hold a special meeting. 

2.  Purposes for Which a Special Meeting May be Held 

The only purposes for which a special meeting may be held are set forth in section 
11125.4, and are drawn from the purposes for which an emergency meeting could be held 
under the prior law.  In essence, the Legislature recharacterized those purposes as 
constituting “special” circumstances rather than “emergency” circumstances.  Section 
11125.4 provides in part that: 

Rev. 1/17 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
”(a)  A special meeting may be called at any time by the presiding officer 

of the state body or by a majority of the members of the state body.  A special 
meeting may only be called for one of the following purposes when compliance 
with the 10-day notice provisions of Section 11125 would impose a substantial 
hardship on the state body or where immediate action is required to protect the 
public interest: 

(1)  To consider ‘pending litigation’ as that term is defined in subdivision 

(e) of Section 11126. 

(2)  To consider proposed legislation. 

(3)  To consider issuance of a legal opinion. 

(4)  To consider disciplinary action involving a state officer or employee. 

(5)  To consider the purchase, sale, exchange, or lease of real property. 

(6)  To consider license examinations and applications. 

(7)  To consider an action on a loan or grant provided pursuant to 
Division 31 (commencing with Section 50000) of the Health and Safety Code. 

(8)  To consider its response to a confidential final draft audit report as 

permitted by Section 11126.2. 

(9)  To provide for an interim executive officer of a state body upon the death, 

incapacity, or vacancy in the office of the executive officer. 

*  *  *” 

Department of Consumer Affairs licensing boards would most likely hold a special 

meeting for the purposes set forth in subdivisions (1), (2), (3), (4), and (6). 

3.  Notice Requirements for a Special Meeting 

A special meeting can be called at any time by the presiding officer or a majority of the 
members of the state body, provided the 10-day notice requirements of section 11125 “would 
impose a substantial hardship on the state body or where immediate action is required to 
protect the public interest.”  (§11125.4(a))  The only purposes for which the meeting can be 
held are those set forth above. 

The normal 10-day advance notice is not required for special meetings.  However, 

notice of the special meeting is required to be provided to each member of the state agency 
and to persons who have requested notice of the agency’s meetings as soon as practicable 
after the decision to hold the meeting is made.  Notice to members, newspapers of general 
circulation, and radio or television stations must be received at least 48 hours in advance of 
the meeting.  Notice to newspapers, radio and television stations is satisfied by providing 

Rev. 1/17 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notice to all national press wire services.  Notices to the general public may be given via 
appropriate electronic bulletin boards or other appropriate mechanisms.  (§11125.4(b))  The 
notice must also be posted on the Internet at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. 

The notice must specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to 

be transacted.  In essence, an agenda would be prepared.  No business other than that 
noticed may be transacted. Notice is required even if no action is subsequently taken at the 
meeting. (§11125.4(b))  The notice must contain the Website address where the notice may 
be accessed on the Internet. 

[CAVEAT:  If the special meeting will have a closed session agenda item or 

items, or be held by teleconference, please refer to the discussion of additional 
requirements under those headings, below.] 

4.  Specific Requirements During Special Meetings 

At the commencement of a special meeting, the agency must make a finding in open 
session that providing a 10-day notice of the meeting would pose a substantial hardship on 
the agency, or that immediate action is required to protect the public interest.  The specific 
facts constituting the hardship or need for immediate action must be articulated.  This finding 
must be adopted by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the agency members present, or if less than 
two thirds of the members are present, by a unanimous vote of the members present.  Failure 
to adopt the finding terminates the meeting. The agency’s finding must be made available on 
the Internet.  (§11125.4(c)) 

5.  Specific Prohibitions on Holding a Special Meeting 

As discussed above, a special meeting may only be held for the purposes set forth in 

section 11125.4(b). Other than the limitation on the purposes of the meeting, there are no 
statutory prohibitions in the Open Meeting Act on a board, committee, subcommittee or task 
force conducting a special meeting. 

C.  “Emergency” Meetings 

1.  Who May Hold an Emergency Meeting 

A board, committee, subcommittee or task force may hold an emergency meeting. 

2.  Purposes for Which an Emergency Meeting May be Held 

As noted above, S.B. 95 of 1997 recharacterized a number of “emergency” situations 
as “special” situations.  This resulted in the narrowing of situations for which an emergency 
meeting may be held.  Section 11125.5 provides an emergency meeting may be held only in 
the case of an “emergency situation,” defined as: 

“(1)  Work stoppage or other activity that severely impairs public health 

or safety, or both. 

Rev. 1/17 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“(2)  Crippling disaster that severely impairs public health or safety, or 

both.”  (§11125.5(b)) 

3.  Notice Requirements for an Emergency Meeting 

An emergency meeting may be held without complying with the 10-day notice 
requirement in Section 11125 or the 48-hour notice requirement in Section 11125.4. 
However, newspapers of general circulation, television and radio stations that have 
requested notice of meetings shall be notified of the emergency by telephone at least one 
hour before the meeting.  If telephone services are not functioning, notice is deemed waived. 
The notice must be posted on the Internet as soon as practicable after the decision to call an 
emergency meeting has been made.  However, newspapers, television and radio must be 
notified as soon as possible after the meeting of the fact of the meeting, its purpose, and any 
action taken.  (§11125.5(c))    

4.  Specific Requirements for an Emergency Meeting 

The following are required to be posted in a public place and on the Internet for a 

minimum of 10 days, as soon as possible after the emergency meeting: 

* 
* 
* 
* 

Minutes of the meeting 
A list of persons notified, or attempted to be notified, of the meeting 
Any action taken at the meeting 
A copy of the rollcall vote on action taken (§11125.5(d)) 

5.  Specific Prohibitions on Holding an Emergency Meeting 

As discussed above, an emergency meeting may only be held for the purposes set 

forth in section 11125.5(b). 

IV.  CLOSED SESSIONS 

A.  Purposes for Which Closed Session Can be Held 

"Closed" sessions were formerly called "executive" sessions.  Since all references in 

the Open Meeting Act have been changed from "executive" session to "closed" session, 
throughout this memorandum we will refer to such sessions as "closed" sessions. 

Section 11123 states that "All meetings of a state body shall be open and public and 

all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting of a state body except as otherwise 
provided in this article." 

Section 11126 sets forth those specific items of business which may be transacted in 

closed session.  Only those enumerated items of business may be conducted in closed 
session.  An agency in the Department may convene a closed session pursuant to Section 
11126 for the following purposes: 

Rev. 1/17 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Personnel Matters 

A board may meet in closed session to " . . . consider the appointment, employment, 

evaluation of performance, or dismissal of a public employee or to hear complaints or 
charges brought against such employee by another person unless the employee requests a 
public hearing." In order to consider such disciplinary action or dismissal the "employee shall 
be given written notice of his or her right to have a public hearing . . . which notice shall be 
delivered to the employee personally or by mail at least 24 hours before the meeting." 
(§11126(a))  If such a notice is not given any action taken during a closed session for the 
above reason is null and void.  Once the public hearing has been held, the agency may 
convene into closed session to deliberate on the decision to be reached.  (§11126(a)(4)) 

Prior to January 1, 1995, section 11126(a) did not apply to employees who were 

appointed to their positions, such as executive officers, executive directors, and registrars 
(referred to as “executive officer” for convenience).  For example, any decision or 
deliberations made in the selection or dismissal of an executive officer previously had to be 
conducted in open session.  (68 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 34.)  However, with the enactment of SB 
1316 (Stats. 1994, Chapt. 845) and SB 95 (Stats. 1997, Chapt. 949), a board can now meet 
in closed session to consider the appointment, employment, evaluation of, or dismissal of its 
executive officer, unless the executive officer requests a public hearing.  (§11126(a)(1), (2)) 
SB 1316 supersedes the conclusion reached in 68 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 34.  As noted above, 
once the public hearing has been held, the state body may convene in closed session to 
deliberate on the decision to be reached.  (§11126(a)(4)) 

If the executive officer does not request a public hearing, he or she must be given the 
opportunity for a hearing in closed session.  After the hearing, the executive officer should be 
excused from the closed session, and the board may then continue in closed session to 
deliberate on the decision to be reached.  (§11126(a)(4)) 

Section 11126(a) is not to be interpreted to mean that a board is required to handle 

civil service personnel matters itself.  Normally, this function of an agency is administered by 
its executive officer in conjunction with the Director of Consumer Affairs, who shares authority 
with respect to civil service personnel. 

2.  Examination Matters 

A board may meet in closed session to "prepare, approve, grade or administer 
examinations."  (§11126(c)(1))  Essentially, this includes any discussion regarding the actual 
content of examinations, and their reliability and validity.  If an agency is perusing 
examination samples in order to choose one over the others, this may be done in closed 
session.  On the other hand, if an agency is discussing, for example, the general logistics of 
administering an examination, then this would not be proper subject matter for a closed 
session.  A basic rule is that if a meeting concerns the grading, specific content, validity of an 
examination, or examination security, then it can and should be conducted in closed session. 

Also, an agency may hear appeals from examinees or re-review examinations in 

closed session as this would be included in the "grading" of the examination. 

Rev. 1/17 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Matters Affecting Individual Privacy 

A committee, consisting of less than a quorum of the full board, may meet in closed 

session to: 

" . . . discuss matters which the [committee] has found would constitute an 
unwarranted invasion of the privacy of an individual licensee or applicant if 
discussed in an open meeting, . . . Those matters may include review of an 
applicant's qualifications for licensure and an inquiry specifically related to the 
state body's enforcement program concerning an individual licensee or 
applicant where the inquiry occurs prior to the filing of a civil, criminal, or 
administrative disciplinary action against the licensee or applicant by the state 
body."  (§11126(c)(2)) 

Thus, review by a committee (or subcommittee of an examining committee) of an 

applicant's qualifications for licensure could properly be done in a closed session.  Also, for 
example, an enforcement committee could convene in closed session to discuss an inquiry 
related to a particular licensee or licensees prior to any action being filed. 

CAVEAT:  This closed session provision does not authorize such a review by the full 
board.  Nor does it generally authorize a committee of a board to review complaints, 
investigation reports, or other information to determine whether disciplinary or other 
action should be filed against a licensee. 

To ensure that board members render an impartial and fair decision in considering an 
Administrative Law Judge's proposed decision, board members are precluded from involving 
themselves in the investigation or prosecution phase of an action.  (§11430.10 et seq.)  The 
board's role is that of judge in the case.  If a particular board member has any significant 
involvement in the investigative or prosecution phases, he or she must disqualify 
himself/herself from participation in the board's action relative to the proposed decision, and 
not attempt to influence any other board member regarding the decision.  Legal counsel 
should be consulted before any enforcement actions are discussed with individual licensees, 
as such discussions may impact participation by the member in a final decision on a case 
(§11430.60), and may require disclosures under the provisions of the state’s Administrative 
Procedure Act.  (§11430.50) 

Even though these committee meetings may consist entirely of subject matter proper 

for closed session they are required to be noticed as discussed above. 

4.  Administrative Disciplinary Matters 

A board may meet in closed session to deliberate on a decision in an administrative 

disciplinary proceeding under the Administrative Procedure Act.  (§11400, et seq.; 
§11126(c)(3))  In the closed session, the board may decide whether to adopt a Proposed 
Decision, review a transcript of a hearing and render a decision of its own, deliberate upon 
evidence heard by the agency itself, or consider a stipulation. 

Rev. 1/17 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This section does not authorize an agency to convene into closed session for the 
purpose of assigning cases, i.e. deciding whether a case should be heard by a hearing officer 
alone or by the agency itself with a hearing officer.  This section does not authorize an 
agency to convene into closed session to review investigation files or complaints.  Members 
of boards that have the discretion to hear cases should not review pending complaints or 
investigation files for the reasons given above. 

5.  Board of Accountancy Matters 

The enforcement advisory committee established by the State Board of Accountancy 
pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 5020 may convene in a closed session 
to "consider disciplinary action against an individual accountant prior to the filing of an 
accusation."  (§11126(f)(3))  And the qualifications examining committee established by that 
board pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 5023 may convene in closed 
session to "interview an individual applicant or accountant regarding the applicant's 
qualifications." 

As noted above, such administrative and examining committee meetings are required 

to be noticed as previously discussed in this memorandum. 

6.  Pending Litigation 

A board may meet in closed session to confer with or receive advice from its legal 

counsel regarding pending litigation when discussion in open session concerning those 
matters would prejudice the position of the state body in the litigation.  (§11126(e)(1))  Again, 
please note the very specific notice requirements discussed below when a closed session is 
to be held to discuss "pending litigation".  Litigation means an adjudicatory proceeding before 
a court, administrative body, hearing officer or arbitrator.  Litigation is considered to be 
pending if, (1) it has been initiated formally (e.g. a complaint, claim or petition has been filed) 
or (2) based on existing facts and circumstances and on the advice of its legal counsel, the 
state body believes there is significant exposure to litigation against it, or it is meeting to 
decide whether a closed session is authorized because of significant exposure to litigation or 
(3) based on existing facts and circumstances, the state body has decided or is deciding 
whether to initiate litigation.  (§11126(e)(2)) 

The agency's legal counsel must submit a memorandum which complies with the 

requirements of Section 11126(e)(2)(C)(ii) prior to the closed session if possible, but no later 
than one week after the closed session. This document is confidential until the pending 
litigation has been finally adjudicated or otherwise settled.  (§6254.25) 

7.  Response to Confidential Final Draft Audit Report 

Section 11126.2 (added effective January 1, 2005) permits an agency to meet in 

closed session to discuss its response to a confidential final draft audit report from the 
Bureau of State Audits.  However, once that audit report becomes final and is released to the 
public, the agency may only discuss it in open session. 

Rev. 1/17 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Threat of Criminal or Terrorist Activity 

Effective January 1, 2006, AB 277 (Chap. 288, Stats. 2005) authorizes an agency at a 

regular or special meeting to meet in closed session to consider “matters posing a threat or 
potential threat of criminal or terrorist activity against the personnel, property, buildings, 
facilities, or equipment, including electronic data, owned, leased, or controlled by the state 
body,” where disclosure of those considerations could compromise or impede the safety or 
security of the described subjects.  The law (Section 11126(c)(18)) requires the agency to 
authorize the closed session by a two-thirds vote of the members present at the meeting. 

9.  Advisory Bodies/Committees May Meet in Closed Session 

To the extent a licensing board, which is defined as a “state body” in the Open Meeting 

Act, is authorized to meet in closed session, then committees, subcommittees, or other 
bodies advisory to the licensing board, which are also defined as “state bodies,” may meet in 
closed session for the same purposes as the licensing board.  (§11126((f), (4)-(6)) 

10.  Open Session Otherwise Required 

Any other business transacted by an agency must be in open session.  Only for the 
above-mentioned reasons may a board within the Department of Consumer Affairs meet in 
closed session.  (§11132)  A board may not meet in closed session for the purpose of 
electing officers or to discuss the proposal or adoption of rules and regulations.  Further, a 
board may not convene in closed session to discuss testimony received during a hearing on 
proposed rules and regulations.  Finally, an agency may not meet in closed session because 
it wants to have a frank and open discussion among only members on a matter of 
controversy.  In order for an agency to meet in closed session, the closed session must be 
specifically authorized by statute. 

B.  Notice and Reporting Requirements for Closed Sessions 

1.  Notice of Closed Session 

When a closed session will constitute part or all of a meeting, it is important to note 

Government Code Section 11126.3, which requires that: 

"(a)  Prior to holding any closed session, the state body shall disclose, in an 
open meeting, the general nature of the item or items to be discussed in the 
closed session.  The disclosure may take the form of a reference to the item or 
items as they are listed by number or letter on the agenda.  [A provision 
applicable to the Public Utilities Commission is not included herein.]  If the 
session is closed pursuant to subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) of subdivision 
(e) of Section 11126 [litigation has already commenced], the state body shall 
state the title of, or otherwise specifically identify, the litigation to be discussed 
unless the body states that to do so would jeopardize the body's ability to 
effectuate service of process upon one or more unserved parties, or that to do 
so would jeopardize its ability to conclude existing settlement negotiations to its 
advantage." 

Rev. 1/17 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, if the meeting will consist in part or in its entirety of a closed session, you must 

include on the notice of the meeting the above-described information.  Pay particular 
attention to these very specific requirements if the closed session is to discuss pending 
litigation.  Please note that to obtain legal advice in closed session concerning pending 
litigation, the notice must cite subdivision (e) of Section 11126 and your attorney must 
prepare a memorandum stating the specific reasons and legal authority for the closed 
session.  Subdivisions of Government Code Section 11126, discussed under "Closed 
Sessions" above, will generally be the statutory authority cited. 

If a closed session agenda to discuss pending litigation has been properly published, 
and an additional pending litigation issue subsequently arises, the state agency may discuss 
the new matter in closed session provided that postponement of the discussion would 
prevent the state agency from complying with any statutory, court-ordered, or other legally-
imposed deadline.  The state agency must publicly announce the title of, or otherwise 
identify, the litigation unless to do so would jeopardize the ability to effectuate service of 
process, or to do so would jeopardize the agency’s ability to conclude existing settlement 
negotiations to its advantage.  (§11126.3(d)) 

If you intend to have a closed session during your meeting, you should first contact 

your Legal Division attorney to ensure that a closed session is authorized and properly 
noticed. 

2.  Reporting After a Closed Session 

Section 11126.3(f), requires a state body to convene in open session after a closed 

session and to report as required in Section 11125.2, which states that: 

“Any state body shall report publicly at a subsequent public meeting any 

action taken, and any rollcall vote thereon, to appoint, employ, or dismiss a 
public employee arising out of any closed session of the state body.” 

C.  Other Procedural Requirements for Closed Sessions 

There are certain additional requirements that must be met when closed sessions are 

to be held. 

1.  All closed sessions must be held during a regular or special meeting (§11128); they 
may not be scheduled independently of a noticed meeting of the board or committee.  Where, 
for example, a board or committee meeting is scheduled to discuss only matters appropriate 
for a closed session, the meeting should be opened as a public meeting with an 
announcement immediately following that the agency will convene into closed session. 

2.  As discussed under "Notice Required," above, prior to holding the closed session 

the agency must announce the general reason(s) for the closed session and the specific 
statutory or other legal authority under which the session is held.  (§11126.3 (a))  With 
respect to litigation that has already been initiated, it must announce the title of or otherwise 
identify the litigation.  (§11126.3(a))  Other specific notice requirements, discussed above, 

Rev. 1/17 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
also apply to notices regarding pending litigation.  In the closed session, only matters covered 
in the statement may be discussed.  (§11126.3(b)) 

3.  The agency is required to designate a staff person to attend the closed session and 

to record in a minute book a record of topics discussed and decisions made.  (§11126.1) 

4.  The minute book referenced in (3) is available only to members of the agency, or if 

a violation of the Open Meeting Act is alleged, to a court of general jurisdiction.  (§11126.1) 

5.  Information received and discussions held in closed session are confidential and 

must not be disclosed to outside parties by members or staff who attended the closed 
session.  A recent opinion of the Office of the California Attorney General concluded that: 

“A local school board member may not publicly disclose information that 

has been received and discussed in closed session concerning pending 
litigation unless the information is authorized by law to be disclosed.”  (80 
Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 231) 

That opinion also cited a previous opinion, in which the Attorney General stated that 
“We have ... routinely observed that it would be improper for information received during a 
closed session to be publicly disclosed.”  (76 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 289, 290-291; Emphasis in 
the original.) 

V.  MEETING BY TELECONFERENCING 

Prior to January 1, 1995, the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act contained no provision 
for conducting meetings where the participating members were not physically present in one 
location. 

Effective 1/1/95, subdivision (b) was added to Government Code section 11123 to 
authorize meetings by teleconference.  (Stats. 1994, Chapt. 1153; AB 3467)  That subdivision 
has been amended several times, most recently by AB 192 of 2001, and it currently provides: 

"(a)  All meetings of a state body shall be open and public and all 

persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting of a state body except as 
otherwise provided in this article. 

"(b) (1)  This article does not prohibit a state body from holding an open 

or closed meeting by teleconference for the benefit of the public and state 
body.  The meeting or proceeding held by teleconference shall otherwise 
comply with all applicable requirements or laws relating to a specific type of 
meeting or proceeding, including the following: 

(A)  The teleconferencing meeting shall comply with all
 

requirements of this article applicable to other meetings.
 

Rev. 1/17 

17 

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B)  The portion of the teleconferenced meeting that is required 
to be open to the public shall be audible to the public at the location specified 
in the notice of the meeting. 

(C)  If the state body elects to conduct a meeting or proceeding 

by teleconference, it shall post agendas at all teleconference locations and 
conduct teleconference meetings in a manner that protects the rights of any 
party or member of the public appearing before the state body.  Each 
teleconference location shall be identified in the notice and agenda of the 
meeting or proceeding, and each teleconference location shall be accessible 
to the public.  The agenda shall provide an opportunity for members of the 
public to address the state body directly pursuant to Section 11125.7 at each 
teleconference location. 

(D)  All votes taken during a teleconferenced meeting shall be by 

rollcall. 

(E)  The portion of the teleconferenced meeting that is closed to 
the public may not include the consideration of any agenda item being heard 
pursuant to Section 11125.5. 

(F)  At least one member of the state body shall be physically 

present at the location specified in the notice of the meeting. 

(2)  For the purposes of this subdivision, 'teleconference' means a 
meeting of a state body, the members of which are at different locations, 
connected by electronic means, through either audio or both audio and video. 
This section does not prohibit a state body from providing members of the 
public with additional locations in which the public may observe or address the 
state body by electronic means, through either audio or both audio and video." 

A method is thus available whereby meetings may be conducted by audio or video 

teleconferencing provided the criteria set forth in the statute have been met.  Note the 
restriction in subdivision (b)(1)(E) that prohibits a closed session emergency meeting. 
Emergency meetings in open session may be conducted by teleconference. 

Effective January 1, 2015, subdivision (c) was added to Government Code section 

11123 to require that any action taken and the vote or abstention on that action of each 
member present for the action be publicly reported by the state body.  (Stats. 2014, 
Chapt.510; AB 2720) 

We emphasize that the law now requires every teleconference meeting location to be 

identified in the notice and agenda and to be open to the public.  Most importantly, the 
members of the agency must attend the meeting at a public location.  Members are no longer 
able to attend the meeting via teleconference from their offices, homes, or other convenient 
location unless those locations are identified in the notice and agenda, and the public is 
permitted to attend at those locations.  Nothing prohibits additional locations, where only the 
public is connected to the teleconference meeting.  (§11123(b)(2)) 

Rev. 1/17 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI.  DELIBERATIONS AND VOTING 

Keep in mind the Open Meeting Act declaration of legislative intent that actions of 
state agencies be taken openly and that their deliberation be conducted openly.  (§11120)  In 
this regard, there are a number of provisions in the Open Meeting Act which address 
deliberations and voting. 

A.  Seriatim Calls to Individual Agency Members Prohibited 

Except as authorized by the above-discussed teleconferencing statutes, telephone 
conference calls may not be used to avoid the requirements of the Open Meeting Act.  A 
conference call including members of a board, committee, subcommittee or task force 
sufficient to constitute a majority of that state body is prohibited, except pursuant to an 
authorized teleconference meeting. 

In a case involving the Ralph M. Brown Act, the court concluded that a series of one-

to-one telephone calls between members of a local body, where the purpose of the calls was 
to obtain a collective commitment on an issue, constituted a violation of the Act.  (Stockton 
Newspapers, Inc. v. Members of the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Stockton (1985) 
171 Cal.App.3d 95)  The Brown Act is the local agency counterpart to the Bagley-Keene 
Open Meeting Act, and decisions rendered on its provisions are frequently followed in Open 
Meeting Act cases. 

Citing the Stockton Newspapers, Inc. case, the court in Sutter Bay Associates v. 

County of Sutter held that to prevent evasion of the Brown Act, a series of private meetings 
(known as serial meetings) by which a majority of the members of the legislative body commit 
themselves to a decision concerning public business or engage in collective deliberation on 
public business would violate the open meeting requirement.  ((1997) 58 Cal.App.4th 860, 
877, 68 Cal.Rptr.2d 492, 502) 

Effective January 1, 2010, the Act now specifically prohibits serial communications 

between a majority of members “to discuss, deliberate, or take action on any item of business 
that is within the subject matter of the state agency.” (Emphasis added.) (§11122.5(b)) 

B.  E-Mail Prohibition 

Section 11122.5 was amended by Stats. 2009, c. 150 (A.B. 1494) to provide: 

(b)(1) A majority of the members of the state body shall not, outside of a meeting authorized 
by this chapter, use a series of communications of any kind, directly or through intermediaries 
to discuss, deliberate, or take action on any item of business that is within the subject matter 
of the state body. 

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not be construed to prevent an employee or official of a state agency 
from engaging in separate conversations or communications outside of a meeting authorized 
by this chapter with members of a legislative body in order to answer questions or provide 
information regarding a matter that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the state 

Rev. 1/17 

19 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agency, if that person does not communicate to members of the legislative body the 
comments or position or any other member or members of the legislative body. 

The enactment of subdivision (b) of section 11122.5, expands upon and 

confirms a recent opinion of the Attorney General prohibiting the use of e-mail to 
reach a collective decision outside a regularly scheduled meeting.  In 84 
Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 30, the Attorney General concluded that: 

"A majority of  the board  members of  a  local public  agency may not  e-
mail each other to develop a collective concurrence as to action to be taken by 
the board without violating the Ralph M. Brown Act even if the e-mails are also 
sent to the secretary and chairperson of the agency, the e-mails are posted on 
the agency's Internet website, and a printed version of each e-mail is reported 
at the next public meeting of the board." 

As  noted  above,  interpretations  of  the  Brown  Act,  which  governs  local public 
agencies, are often cited as authority in interpreting similar provisions of the Bagley-
Keene Open Meeting Act. 

Members of a board must refrain from calling or otherwise contacting other members 
on a one-to-one basis, or conducting serial meetings, in order to discuss, deliberate, or take 
action outside the meeting on a matter within the subject matter of the board. 

C.  Secret Ballot Prohibited 

An agency may not vote by secret ballot in a public meeting nor vote in closed session 

on any matter where discussion, deliberations, or action taken is required to be in an open 
meeting.  (68 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 65, 69) 

For example, the election of board officers may not be conducted by secret ballot or in 

closed session. 

D.  Voting by Proxy Prohibited 

Voting by proxy is not authorized.  (68 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 65, 70) 

E.  Use of Electronic Devices During Meeting 

Board members should not text or email each other during an open meeting on any 
matter within the board’s jurisdiction.  Using electronic devices to communicate secretly on 
such a matter would violate the law.  Where laptops are used by board members at the 
meeting because the board provides board materials electronically, the board president 
should make an announcement at the beginning of the meeting as to the reason for the 
laptops.  We suggest the following (or something similar): 

“You may notice board members accessing their laptops during the meeting.  They are 
using the laptops solely to access the board meeting materials which are in electronic 
format.” 

Rev. 1/17 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F.  Voting by Mail on Administrative Disciplinary Matters 

As a general rule, all voting on items of business to be transacted must be done at a 

public meeting.  However, the Administrative Procedure Act authorizes mail voting on all 
questions arising under that act. (Govt. Code §11526.)  Thus, board members may vote by 
mail on proposed decisions, stipulated decisions, and other matters in connection with a 
formal disciplinary case.  No other votes may be cast by mail.  (68 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 65, 69) 

G.  Recording and Reporting Votes 

Beginning January 1, 2015, for each item on which a vote is taken, the minutes must 

contain a record of how each member voted on that action item.  (For example, Yes – 
Members A, B, & C; No – Members D & E; Abstain – Member F.) 

VII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

There are several provisions governing public meetings which do not fit under any of 

the above headings, but of which you should be aware. 

A.  Conforming Board Member's Conduct 

Any person who has been appointed as a member of a state body, who has not yet 
assumed the duties of the office, must conform his or her conduct to the provisions of the 
Open Meeting Act.  (§11125.95 

B.  Providing Open Meeting Act to New Board Members 

A copy of the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act must be provided to each agency 
member upon his or her appointment to office.  Each agency should insure that a copy is 
given to each new member.  (§11121.9.) 

C.  Prohibition on Placing Conditions on Public’s Attendance 

1.  Sign-in 

No person can be required to register or sign-in or fulfill any other condition in order to 

attend a public meeting of an agency.  While a person who wishes to make public comment 
may be asked to identify himself or herself for the board's record or minutes, a commenter 
cannot be compelled to do so or prevented from speaking because the commenter refuses to 
identify himself or herself. 

If an attendance list, register, questionnaire, or other similar document is posted at or 

near the entrance to the room where the meeting is to be held, or is circulated to persons 
present during the meeting, “it shall state clearly that the signing, registering, or completion of 
the document is voluntary, and that all persons may attend the meeting regardless of whether 
a person signs, registers, or completes the document.”  (§11124) 

Rev. 1/17 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Discrimination in Admittance to Meeting Facility 

A meeting may not be held in any facility that prohibits the admittance of any persons 

on the basis of race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, or sex.  (§11131) 

3.  Access for the Disabled 

All meetings must be accessible to the disabled.  (§11131) 

4.  Charging a Fee or Requiring a Purchase for Access 

The Open Meeting Act prohibits holding a meeting in any location where the public is 

required to pay a fee or make a purchase to attend.  (§11131)  

D.  Agency Recording of the Proceedings 

A tape or film record of an open and public meeting made by the agency must be 
made available for public inspection under the California Public Records Act, but may be 
erased or destroyed 30 days after the taping or recording.  An inspection must be provided 
without charge on an audio or video tape player made available by the state agency. 
(§11124.1(b)) 

E.  Public’s Right to Record the Proceedings 

Persons attending a public meeting have a right to record the proceedings with an 

audio or video tape recorder or still or motion picture camera, in the absence of a reasonable 
finding by the agency that the recording could not continue without noise, illumination, or 
obstruction of view that constitutes, or would constitute a persistent disruption of the 
proceedings.  (§11124.1(a)) 

F.  Media Broadcast of the Proceedings 

A state body may not prohibit or otherwise restrict the broadcast of a public meeting in 

the absence of a reasonable finding that the broadcast cannot be accomplished without 
noise, illumination, or obstruction of view that would constitute a persistent disruption of the 
proceedings.  (§11124.1(c))   

G.  Webcasting 

Whether or not webcasting is required, if your meeting is webcast, it is our 

recommendation that you place the following statement on your agenda: 

“While the board intends to webcast this meeting, it may not be possible to webcast 
the entire open meeting due to limitations on resources.” 

Rev. 1/17 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H.  Taking Agenda Items Out of Order 

Items listed on the agenda may be taken up out of order, provided the purpose of 
moving the agenda items is not to frustrate public or other input on the item.  It is a good 
practice to note on either the top or the bottom of your agenda that “All times indicated and 
the order of business are approximate and subject to change,” to alert members of the public 
this is a possibility. 

If your agency schedules a multiple day meeting and may move items scheduled for a 

subsequent day to an earlier day, you should provide notice of this possibility on your 
agenda.  Suggested language is that “Items scheduled for a particular day may be moved to 
an earlier day to facilitate the board’s business.”  Again, the purpose may not be to frustrate 
public or other input. 

I.  Opportunity for Public Comment at Meetings 

Section 11125.7 addresses the subject of public comment at board meetings. With 

specified exceptions, that section requires state agencies to provide an opportunity for 
members of the public to directly address the state agency on each agenda item before or 
during the agency's discussion or consideration of the item.  This opportunity for comment 
need not be made available if: 

1.  The agenda item has previously been considered at a public meeting by a 
committee comprised exclusively of board members, where members of the public 
were provided an opportunity to address the item.  However, if the item has been 
substantially changed since the committee meeting, a new opportunity to address the 
agency would be required at the full board meeting. 

2.  The agenda item is one that may properly be considered in closed session, which 
would include deliberation and action on disciplinary proceedings under the 
Administrative Procedure Act.  (§11125.7) 

If a board wishes to establish a standing rule that discussion of agenda items will be 

given a specified amount of time, or that public comment will be limited to a certain amount of 
time, the board may do that by adopting an administrative regulation.  (§11125.7(b)) 

Section 11125.7 was amended, effective June 27, 2016 to provide an equal time 
provision when the state body limits the time for public comment, by requiring the state body 
to provide at least twice the allotted time to a member of the public who uses a translator. 
This amendment is to ensure that non-English speakers receive an equal opportunity to 
address the state body when simultaneous translation equipment is not used.  (Stats of 2016 
chapt. 31 SB 836) 

The law specifically provides that a state agency may not prohibit public criticism of its 

policies, programs, or services, or of the acts or omissions of the agency.  (§11125.7(c))   

Rev. 1/17 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII. DISCLOSURE OF DOCUMENTS 

A.  Documents Distributed Prior to the Meeting 

When writings which are public records are distributed to all, or a majority of all, of the 

members of a board or committee for discussion or consideration at a public meeting, the 
writings must be made available for public inspection.  Generally, the records must be made 
available for inspection at the time of distribution to agency members.  (§11125.1(a)) 
Records exempt from disclosure under Sections 6253.5, 6254 or 6254.7 of the Public 
Records Act need not be disclosed even though the subject matter of the records may be 
considered or discussed at the meeting.  This includes records which are drafts, notes or 
memoranda which will not be retained by the agency, attorney-client privileged 
communications, records of pending litigation and claims against the state, personnel, 
medical or similar files, complaint and investigation files, except for Accusations and 
Proposed Decisions, and any records or data relating to examinations. 

B.  Documents Distributed During the Meeting 

When public records pertaining to an agenda item are prepared by the state body or a 

member of the state body, and distributed to state body members during a meeting, the 
documents must be made available for public inspection at the meeting.  If records are 
prepared by some other person, and distributed to members of the state body during a 
meeting, the documents must be made available for public inspection after the meeting. 
(§11125.1(b))  Records exempt from public disclosure under specified statutes are not 
required to be publicly disclosed.  (§11125.1(a), (b)) 

C.  Charging a Fee for Public Documents 

Under section 11126.7, an agency may not charge a fee for a notice, including the 

agenda, of a meeting, and may only charge those fees specifically authorized for public 
documents that are considered at the meeting 

At its discretion, an agency may charge a fee to cover reproduction costs for providing 

the documents required to be made available, as discussed in paragraph (B), immediately 
above.  If an agency charges a fee, it is limited to the direct costs of duplication authorized in 
Section 6257 for the reproduction of public records. (§11125.1(c)) 

Effective January 1, 2003, documents distributed prior to or during a meeting that are 

public records must be made available, upon request by a person with a disability, in 
appropriate alternative formats.  No extra charge can be imposed for putting those 
documents into an alternative format. 

IX.  PENALTIES 

Under previous law, any interested person could commence court action (mandamus, 
injunction, declaratory relief) to stop or prevent violations or threatened violations of the Open 

Rev. 1/17 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meeting Act.  SB 95, effective 1/1/98, added the Attorney General and the district attorney to 
the list of those who may commence such action.  Court costs and reasonable attorney's fees 
may be awarded to a successful plaintiff to be paid from the funds of the agency.  (§11130.5) 
SB 95 also expanded the law to authorize the Attorney General, a district attorney, or 

any interested person to seek court action “to determine whether any rule or action by the 
state body to penalize or otherwise discourage the expression of one or more of its members 
is valid or invalid under the laws of this state or of the United States, ...”  (§11130(a))  This 
appears to be a rather unique provision, and its implications are unknown at this time. 

SB 95 further expanded the law to authorize the Attorney General, a district attorney, 

or any interested person to seek a court action to compel a state agency to tape record its 
closed sessions.  Upon a judgment of a violation of Section 11126, a court could so compel 
an agency.  Discovery procedures for the tape recordings are also set forth.  (§11130(b), and 
(c))    

Section 11130.3 authorizes a person to institute a court action to obtain a judicial 
determination that an action taken in violation of the notice provisions or the provisions 
governing closed sessions of the Act is null and void.  Court costs and reasonable attorney's 
fees may also be awarded to a successful plaintiff under this section.  This section reinforces 
the need for a specific, informative agenda as required by Section 11125. 

These remedies extend to past actions of an agency.  The statute of limitations for 

bringing an action is 90 days.  (§§11130(c) and 11130.3(a)). 

Section 11130.7 of the Act provides: 

"Each member of a state body who attends a meeting of such body in violation 
of any provision of this article, and where the member intends to deprive the 
public of information to which the member knows or has reason to know the 
public is entitled, is guilty of a misdemeanor."  (Emphasis added.) 

Rev. 1/17 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

11120. Public policy;  legislative 

finding and declaration;  citation of 
article 

It is the public policy of this state 

that public agencies exist to aid in the 
conduct of the people's business and the 
proceedings of public agencies be conducted 
openly so that the public may remain 
informed. 

In enacting this article the 
Legislature finds and declares that it is the 
intent of the law that actions of state 
agencies be taken openly and that their 
deliberation be conducted openly. 

The people of this state do not yield 

their sovereignty to the agencies which serve 
them.  The people, in delegating authority, 
do not give their public servants the right to 
decide what is good for the people to know 
and what is not good for them to know.  The 
people insist on remaining informed so that 
they may retain control over the instruments 
they have created. 

This article shall be known and may 
be cited as the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting 
Act. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4333, § 4;  Stats. 
1981, c. 968, p. 3683, § 4.) 

11121. State body defined 

As used in this article, "state body" 

means each of the following: 

(a) Every state board, or commission, 

or similar multimember body of the state 
that is created by statute or required by law 
to conduct official meetings and every 
commission created by executive order. 

(b)  A board, commission, 
committee, or similar multimember body 
that exercises any authority of a state body 
delegated to it by that state body. 

(c)  An advisory board, advisory 

commission, advisory committee, advisory 
subcommittee, or similar multimember 
advisory body of a state body, if created by 
formal action of the state body or of any 
member of the state body, and if the 
advisory body so created consists of three or 
more persons. 

(d)  A board, commission, 

committee, or similar multimember body on 
which a member of a body that is a state 
body pursuant to this section serves in his or 
her official capacity as a representative of 
that state body and that is supported, in 
whole or in part, by funds provided by the 
state body, whether the multimember body 
is organized and operated by the state body 
or by a private corporation. 

(e) Not withstanding subdivision (a) 

of Section 11121.1, the State Bar of 
California, as described in Section 6001 of 
the Business and Professions Code. This 
subdivision shall become operative on April 
1, 2016. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1980, c. 515, § 1; Stats.1981, c. 
968, p. 3683, § 5; Stats.1984, c. 193, § 38.  Amended 
by Stats.1996, c. 1023 (S.B.1497), § 88, eff. Sept. 29, 
1996; Stats.1996, c. 1064 (A.B.3351), § 783.1, 

1.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

operative July 1, 1997; Stats.2001, c. 243 (A.B.192), 
§ 1; Amended Stats. 2003 ch 62 § 117 (SB 600), 
Stats. 2015, c. 537 (S.B. 387), § 22, eff. January 1, 
2016.) 

(Added by Stats.2001, c. 243 (A.B.192), § 2. 
Amended by Stats. 2008, c. 344 (S.B. 1145), § 2, eff. 
Sept. 26, 2008; Stats. 2015, c. 537 (S.B. 387), § 23, 
eff. January 1, 2016.) 

11121.1. State body; exclusions 

As used in this article, "state body" 

c. 243 (A.B.192), § 3 

does not include any of the following: 

11121.2. Repealed by Stats. 2001, 

(a) Except as provided in subdivision 

(e) of Section 11121,  state agencies 
provided for in Article VI of the California 
Constitution. 

(b) Districts or other local agencies 
whose meetings are required to be open to 
the public pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown 
Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 
54950) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5). 

(c) State agencies provided for in 
Article IV of the California Constitution 
whose meetings are required to be open to 
the public pursuant to the Grunsky-Burton 
Open Meeting Act (Article 2.2 (commencing 
with Section 9027) of Chapter 1.5 of Part 1 
of Division 2 of Title 2). 

(d) State agencies when they are 

conducting proceedings pursuant to Section 
3596. 

(e) State agencies provided for in 
Section 109260 of the Health and Safety 
Code, except as provided in Section 109390 
of the Health and Safety Code. 

(f) The Credit Union Advisory 

Committee established pursuant to Section 
14380 of the Financial Code. 

The repealed section, added by 

Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3684, § 5.2, provided 
the additional definition of “state body” as a 
multimember body with authority of state 
body. 

§ 11121.5. Repealed by Stats.1984, 

c. 1158, § 3 

The repealed section, added by 

Stats.1994, c. 1179, § 1, amended by 
Stats.1981, c. 968, § 5.3; Stats.1983, c. 143, 
§ 186, Stats.1983, c. 101, § 60, related to the 
treatment of state college and university 
student body organizations as state agencies. 
Similar provisions were added at Education 
Code § 89920 et. seq. 

11121.7. Repealed by Stats. 2001, 

c. 243 (A.B.192), § 4 

The repealed section, added by 

Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4333, § 5, amended 
by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3685, § 6, related to 
representatives of the state body. 

11121.8. Repealed by Stats. 2001, 

c. 243 (A.B.192), § 5 

The repealed section, added by 

2.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3684, § 7, related to 
advisory bodies. 

upon a motion, proposal, resolution, order or 
similar action. 

11121.9. Provision of copy of
 

article to members of state body
 

Each state body shall provide a copy 

of this article to each member of the state 
body upon his or her appointment to 
membership or assumption of office. 

(Added by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4334, § 6. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 714, p. 2659, § 175; 
Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3685, § 7.1.) 

11121.95. Appointees or elected 
officials not yet in office;  conformity of 
conduct to article requirements 

Any person appointed or elected to 
serve as a member of a state body who has 
not yet assumed the duties of office shall 
conform his or her conduct to the 
requirements of this article and shall be 
treated for purposes of this article as if he or 
she has already assumed office. 

(Added by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 1.) 

11122. Action taken 

As used in this article "action taken" 

means a collective decision made by the 
members of a state body, a collective 
commitment or promise by the members of 
the state body to make a positive or negative 
decision or an actual vote by the members of 
a state body when sitting as a body or entity 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3685, § 7.3.) 

11122.5. Meeting defined; series of 
communications to discuss, deliberate, or 
take action prohibited; exceptions 

(a) As used in this article, “meeting” 

includes any congregation of a majority of 
the members of a state body at the same time 
and place to hear, discuss, or deliberate upon 
any item that is within the subject matter 
jurisdiction of the state body to which it 
pertains. 

(b)(1) A majority of the members of 
a state body shall not, outside of a meeting 
authorized by this chapter, use a series of 
communications of any kind, directly or 
through intermediaries, to discuss, 
deliberate, or take action on any item of 
business that is within the subject matter of 
the state body. 

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not be 
construed to prevent an employee or official 
of a state agency from engaging in separate 
conversations or communications outside of 
a meeting authorized by this chapter with 
members of a legislative body in order to 
answer questions or provide information 
regarding a matter that is within the subject 
matter jurisdiction of the state agency, if that 
person does not communicate to members of 
the legislative body the comments or 
position of any other member or members of 
the legislative body. 

3.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

(c) The prohibitions of this article do 

not apply to any of the following: 

(1) Individual contacts or 

conversations between a member of a state 
body and any other person that do not 
violate subdivision (b). 

noticed meeting of another state body or of a 
legislative body of a local agency as defined 
by Section 54951, if a majority of the 
members do not discuss among themselves, 
other than as part of the scheduled meeting, 
business of a specific nature that is within 
the subject matter jurisdiction of the other 
state body. 

(2)(A) The attendance of a majority 

(5) The attendance of a majority of 

of the members of a state body at a 
conference or similar gathering open to the 
public that involves a discussion of issues of 
general interest to the public or to public 
agencies of the type represented by the state 
body, if a majority of the members do not 
discuss among themselves, other than as part 
of the scheduled program, business of a 
specified nature that is within the subject 
matter jurisdiction of the state body. 

(B) Subparagraph (A) does not allow 

members of the public free admission to a 
conference or similar gathering at which the 
organizers have required other participants 
or registrants to pay fees or charges as a 
condition of attendance. 

(3) The attendance of a majority of 
the members of a state body at an open and 
publicized meeting organized to address a 
topic of state concern by a person or 
organization other than the state body, if a 
majority of the members do not discuss 
among themselves, other than as part of the 
scheduled program, business of a specific 
nature that is within the subject matter 
jurisdiction of the state body. 

(4) The attendance of a majority of 
the members of a state body at an open and 

the members of a state body at a purely 
social or ceremonial occasion, if a majority 
of the members do not discuss among 
themselves business of a specific nature that 
is within the subject matter jurisdiction of 
the state body. 

(6) The attendance of a majority of 
the members of a state body at an open and 
noticed meeting of a standing committee of 
that body, if the members of the state body 
who are not members of the standing 
committee attend only as observers. 

(Added by Stats.2001, c. 243 (A.B.192), § 6. 
Amended by Stats.2009, c. 150 (A.B.1494), § 1.) 

11123. Meetings; attendance; 

teleconference option 

(a) All meetings of a state body shall 

be open and public and all persons shall be 
permitted to attend any meeting of a state 
body except as otherwise provided in this 
article. 

(b)(1) This article does not prohibit a 

state body from holding an open or closed 
meeting by teleconference for the benefit of 
the public and state body. The meeting or 
proceeding held by teleconference shall 

4.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

otherwise comply with all applicable 
requirements or laws relating to a specific 
type of meeting or proceeding, including the 
following: 

(A) The teleconferencing meeting 
shall comply with all requirements of this 
article applicable to other meetings. 

(B) The portion of the 

teleconferenced meeting that is required to 
be open to the public shall be audible to the 
public at the location specified in the notice 
of the meeting. 

(C) If the state body elects to conduct 
a meeting or proceeding by teleconference, it 
shall post agendas at all teleconference 
locations and conduct teleconference 
meetings in a manner that protects the rights 
of any party or member of the public 
appearing before the state body. Each 
teleconference location shall be identified in 
the notice and agenda of the meeting or 
proceeding, and each teleconference location 
shall be accessible to the public. The agenda 
shall provide an opportunity for members of 
the public to address the state body directly 
pursuant to Section 11125.7 at each 
teleconference location. 

(D) All votes taken during a 
teleconferenced meeting shall be by rollcall. 

(E) The portion of the 

teleconferenced meeting that is closed to the 
public may not include the consideration of 
any agenda item being heard pursuant to 
Section 11125.5. 

body shall be physically present at the 
location specified in the notice of the 
meeting. 

(2) For the purposes of this 

subdivision, "teleconference" means a 
meeting of a state body, the members of 
which are at different locations, connected 
by electronic means, through either audio or 
both audio and video. This section does not 
prohibit a state body from providing 
members of the public with additional 
locations in which the public may observe or 
address the state body by electronic means, 
through either audio or both audio and 
video. 

(c)  The state body shall publicly 

report any action taken and the vote or 
abstention on that action of each member 
present for the action. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3685, § 7.5; 
Stats.1994, c. 1153 (A.B.3467), § 1; Stats.1997, c. 52 
(A.B.1097), § 1; Stats.2001, c. 243 (A.B.192), § 7; 
Stats.2014, c. 510 (A.B.2720), § 1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.) 

11123.1.  State body meetings to 
meet protections and prohibitions of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act 

All meetings of a state body that are 

open and public shall meet the protections 
and prohibitions contained in Section 202 of 
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 
(42 U.S.C. Sec. 12132), and the federal rules 
and regulations adopted in implementation 
thereof. 

(F) At least one member of the state 

(Added by Stats. 2002, c. 300 (A.B. 3035), § 1.) 

5.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

11124. Conditions to attendance 

No person shall be required, as a 
condition to attendance at a meeting of a 
state body, to register his or her name, to 
provide other information, to complete a 
questionnaire, or otherwise to fulfill any 
condition precedent to his or her attendance. 

If an attendance list, register, 
questionnaire, or other similar document is 
posted at or near the entrance to the room 
where the meeting is to be held, or is 
circulated to persons present during the 
meeting, it shall state clearly that the 
signing, registering, or completion of the 
document is voluntary, and that all persons 
may attend the meeting regardless of 
whether a person signs, registers, or 
completes the document. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3685, § 8.) 

11124.1. Audio or video recording 

of proceedings; inspection of state's 
recording; broadcast restrictions 

(a) Any person attending an open and 

public meeting of the state body shall have 
the right to record the proceedings with an 
audio or video recorder or a still or motion 
picture camera in the absence of a 
reasonable finding by the state body that the 
recording cannot continue without noise, 
illumination, or obstruction of view that 
constitutes, or would constitute, a persistent 
disruption of the proceedings. 

(b) Any audio or video recording of 

an open and public meeting made for 
whatever purpose by or at the direction of 
the state body shall be subject to inspection 
pursuant to the California Public Records 
Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 
6250) of Division 7 of Title 1), but may be 
erased or destroyed 30 days after the 
recording. Any inspection of an audio or 
video recording shall be provided without 
charge on equipment made available by the 
state body. 

(c) No state body shall prohibit or 
otherwise restrict the broadcast of its open 
and public meetings in the absence of a 
reasonable finding that the broadcast cannot 
be accomplished without noise, illumination, 
or obstruction of view that would constitute 
a persistent disruption of the proceedings. 

(Added by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4334, § 7. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3685, § 9; 
Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 2; Stats.2009, c. 88 
(A.B.176), § 42.) 

11125. Notice of meeting 

(a) The state body shall provide 
notice of its meeting to any person who 
requests that notice in writing. Notice shall 
be given and also made available on the 
Internet at least 10 days in advance of the 
meeting, and shall include the name, 
address, and telephone number of any 
person who can provide further information 
prior to the meeting, but need not include a 
list of witnesses expected to appear at the 
meeting. The written notice shall 
additionally include the address of the 

6.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

Internet site where notices required by this 
article are made available. 

(b) The notice of a meeting of a body 

that is a state body shall include a specific 
agenda for the meeting, containing a brief 
description of the items of business to be 
transacted or discussed in either open or 
closed session. A brief general description of 
an item generally need not exceed 20 words. 
A description of an item to be transacted or 
discussed in closed session shall include a 
citation of the specific statutory authority 
under which a closed session is being held. 
No item shall be added to the agenda 
subsequent to the provision of this notice, 
unless otherwise permitted by this article. 

(c) Notice of a meeting of a state 
body that complies with this section shall 
also constitute notice of a meeting of an 
advisory body of that state body, provided 
that the business to be discussed by the 
advisory body is covered by the notice of the 
meeting of the state body, provided that the 
specific time and place of the advisory 
body's meeting is announced during the open 
and public state body's meeting, and 
provided that the advisory body's meeting is 
conducted within a reasonable time of, and 
nearby, the meeting of the state body. 

(d) A person may request, and shall 
be provided, notice pursuant to subdivision 
(a) for all meetings of a state body or for a 
specific meeting or meetings. In addition, at 
the state body's discretion, a person may 
request, and may be provided, notice of only 
those meetings of a state body at which a 
particular subject or subjects specified in the 
request will be discussed. 

(e) A request for notice of more than 
one meeting of a state body shall be subject 
to the provisions of Section 14911. 

(f)  The notice shall be made 
available in appropriate alternative formats, 
as required by Section 202 of the Americans 
with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
Sec. 12132), and the federal rules and 
regulations adopted in implementation 
thereof, upon request, by any person with a 
disability.  The notice shall include 
information regarding how, to whom, and by 
when a request for any disability-related 
modification or accommodation, including 
auxiliary aids or services may be made by a 
person with a disability who requires these 
aids or services in order to participate in the 
public meeting. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1973, c. 1126, p. 2291, § 1; 
Stats.1975, c. 708, p. 1695, § 1; Stats.1979, c. 284, § 
1, eff. July 24, 1979; Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3685, § 
10.  Amended by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 3; 
Stats.1999, c. 393 (A.B.1234), § 1; Stats.2001, c. 243 
(A.B.192), § 8; Stats. 2002, c. 300 (A.B. 3035), § 2.) 

11125.1. Agendas and other 

writings distributed for discussion or 
consideration at public meetings; public 
records; Franchise Tax Board; 
inspection; availability on the Internet; 
closed sessions 

(a) Notwithstanding Section 6255 or 

any other provisions of law, agendas of 
public meetings and other writings, when 
distributed to all, or a majority of  all, of the 
members of a state body by any person in 
connection with a matter subject to 

7.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

discussion or consideration at a public 
meeting of the body, are disclosable public 
records under the California Public Records 
Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 
6250) of Division 7 of Title 1), and shall be 
made available upon request without delay. 
However, this section shall not include any 
writing exempt from public disclosure under 
Section 6253.5, 6254, or 6254.7 of this code, 
or Section 489.1 or 583 of the Public 
Utilities Code. 

(b) Writings that are public records 

under subdivision (a) and that are distributed 
to members of the state body prior to or 
during a meeting, pertaining to any item to 
be considered during the meeting, shall be 
made available for public inspection at the 
meeting if prepared by the state body or a 
member of the state body, or after the 
meeting if prepared by some other person.  
These writings shall be made available in 
appropriate alternative formats, as required 
by Section 202 of the American with 
Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 
12132), and the federal rules and regulations 
adopted in implementation thereof, upon 
request by a person with a disability. 

(c) In the case of the Franchise Tax 
Board, prior to that state body taking final 
action on any item, writings pertaining to 
that item that are public records under 
subdivision (a) that are prepared and 
distributed by the Franchise Tax Board staff 
or individual members to members of the 
state body prior to or during a meeting shall 
be: 

(1) Made available for public 

inspection at that meeting. 

(2) Distributed to all persons who 

request notice in writing pursuant to 
subdivision (a) of Section 11125. 

(3)  Made available on the Internet. 

(d)  Prior to the State Board of 
Equalization taking final action on any item 
that does not involve a named tax or fee 
payer, writings pertaining to that item that 
are public records under subdivision (a) that 
are prepared and distributed by board staff or 
individual members to members of the state 
body prior to or during a meeting shall be: 

(1) Made available for public 

inspection at that meeting. 

(2) Distributed to all persons who 
request or have requested copies of these 
writings. 

(3)  Made available on the Internet. 

(e) Nothing in this section shall be 

construed to prevent a state body from 
charging a fee or deposit for a copy of a 
public record pursuant to Section 6253, 
except that no surcharge shall be imposed on 
persons with disabilities in violation of 
Section 202 of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 
12132), and the federal rules and regulations 
adopted in implementation thereof.  The 
writings described in subdivision (b) are 
subject to the requirements of the California 
Public Records Act (Chapter 3.5 
(commencing with Section 6250) of 
Division 7 of Title 1), and shall not be 
construed to limit or delay the public's right 

8.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

to inspect any record required to be 
disclosed by that act, or to limit the public's 
right to inspect any record covered by that 
act. This section shall not be construed to be 
applicable to any writings solely because 
they are properly discussed in a closed 
session of a state body. Nothing in this 
article shall be construed to require a state 
body to place any paid advertisement or any 
other paid notice in any publication. 

(f) "Writing" for purposes of this 

section means " writing" as defined under 
Section 6252. 

(Added by Stats.1975, c. 959, p. 2238, § 4. Amended 
by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4334, § 8; Stats.1981, c. 
968, p. 3686, § 10.1.  Amended by Stats.1997, c. 949 
(S.B.95), § 4; Stats.2001, c. 670 (S.B.445), § 1; Stats. 
2002, c. 300 (A.B. 3035), § 3.5.); Stats. 2005, c. 188 
(A.B. 780), § 1.) 

11125.2. Appointment, 

employment or dismissal of public 
employees;  closed sessions;  public report 

Any state body shall report publicly 

at a subsequent public meeting any action 
taken, and any rollcall vote thereon, to 
appoint, employ, or dismiss a public 
employee arising out of any closed session 
of the state body. 

(Added by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4335, § 9. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3687, § 10.3.) 

11125.3. Action on items of 
business not appearing on agenda; notice 

state body may take action on items of 
business not appearing on the posted agenda 
under any of the conditions stated below: 

(1) Upon a determination by a 
majority vote of the state body that an 
emergency situation exists, as defined in 
Section 11125.5. 

(2) Upon a determination by a two-
thirds vote of the state body, or, if less than 
two-thirds of the members are present, a 
unanimous vote of those members present, 
that there exists a need to take immediate 
action and that the need for action came to 
the attention of the state body subsequent to 
the agenda being posted as specified in 
Section 11125. 

(b) Notice of the additional item to 

be considered shall be provided to each 
member of the state body and to all parties 
that have requested notice of its meetings as 
soon as is practicable after a determination 
of the need to consider the item is made, but 
shall be delivered in a manner that allows it 
to be received by the members and by 
newspapers of general circulation and radio 
or television stations at least 48 hours before 
the time of the meeting specified in the 
notice. Notice shall be made available to 
newspapers of general circulation and radio 
or television stations by providing that 
notice to all national press wire services. 
Notice shall also be made available on the 
Internet as soon as is practicable after the 
decision to consider additional items at a 
meeting has been made. 

(a) Notwithstanding Section 11125, a 

(Added by Stats.1994, c. 1153 (A.B.3467), § 2. 
Amended by Stats.2001, c. 243 (A.B.192), § 9.) 

9.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

11125.4. Special meetings; 

authorized purposes; notice; required 
finding of hardship or need to protect 
public interest 

(a) A special meeting may be called 

at any time by the presiding officer of the 
state body or by a majority of the members 
of the state body. A special meeting may 
only be called for one of the following 
purposes when compliance with the 10-day 
notice provisions of Section 11125 would 
impose a substantial hardship on the state 
body or where immediate action is required 
to protect the public interest: 

(1) To consider "pending litigation" 
as that term is defined in subdivision (e) of 
Section 11126. 

(2) To consider proposed legislation. 

(3) To consider issuance of a legal 

opinion. 

(4) To consider disciplinary action 

involving a state officer or employee. 

(5) To consider the purchase, sale, 

exchange, or lease of real property. 

(6) To consider license examinations 

and applications. 

(7) To consider an action on a loan 
or grant provided pursuant to Division 31 
(commencing with Section 50000) of the 
Health and Safety Code. 

(8) To consider its response to a 

confidential final draft audit report as 
permitted by Section 11126.2. 

(9) To provide for an interim 

executive officer of a state body upon the 
death, incapacity, or vacancy in the office of 
the executive officer. 

(b) When a special meeting is called 
pursuant to one of the purposes specified in 
subdivision (a), the state body shall provide 
notice of the special meeting to each 
member of the state body and to all parties 
that have requested notice of its meetings as 
soon as is practicable after the decision to 
call a special meeting has been made, but 
shall deliver the notice in a manner that 
allows it to be received by the members and 
by newspapers of general circulation and 
radio or television stations at least 48 hours 
before the time of the special meeting 
specified in the notice. Notice shall be made 
available to newspapers of general 
circulation and radio or television stations 
by providing that notice to all national press 
wire services. Notice shall also be made 
available on the Internet within the time 
periods required by this section. The notice 
shall specify the time and place of the 
special meeting and the business to be 
transacted. The written notice shall 
additionally specify the address of the 
Internet Web site where notices required by 
this article are made available. No other 
business shall be considered at a special 
meeting by the state body. The written 
notice may be dispensed with as to any 
member who at or prior to the time the 
meeting convenes files with the clerk or 
secretary of the state body a written waiver 
of notice. The waiver may be given by 
telegram, facsimile transmission, or similar 
means. The written notice may also be 

10.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

dispensed with as to any member who is 
actually present at the meeting at the time it 
convenes. Notice shall be required pursuant 
to this section regardless of whether any 
action is taken at the special meeting. 

(c) At the commencement of any 

special meeting, the state body must make a 
finding in open session that the delay 
necessitated by providing notice 10 days 
prior to a meeting as required by Section 
11125 would cause a substantial hardship on 
the body or that immediate action is required 
to protect the public interest. The finding 
shall set forth the specific facts that 
constitute the hardship to the body or the 
impending harm to the public interest. The 
finding shall be adopted by a two-thirds vote 
of the body, or, if less than two-thirds of the 
members are present, a unanimous vote of 
those members present. The finding shall be 
made available on the Internet. Failure to 
adopt the finding terminates the meeting. 

(Added by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 5. Amended 
by Stats.1999, c. 393 (A.B.1234), § 2; Stats.2004, c. 
576 (A.B.1827), § 1.); Stats. 2007, c. 92 (S.B. 519), § 
1.) 

11125.5. Emergency meetings 

(a) In the case of an emergency 
situation involving matters upon which 
prompt action is necessary due to the 
disruption or threatened disruption of public 
facilities, a state body may hold an 
emergency meeting without complying with 
the 10-day notice requirement of Section 
11125 or the 48-hour notice requirement of 
Section 11125.4. 

(b) For purposes of this section, 
"emergency situation" means any of the 
following, as determined by a majority of 
the members of the state body during a 
meeting prior to the emergency meeting, or 
at the beginning of the emergency meeting: 

(1) Work stoppage or other activity 

that severely impairs public health or safety, 
or both. 

(2) Crippling disaster that severely 

impairs public health or safety, or both. 

(c) However, newspapers of general 

circulation and radio or television stations 
that have requested notice of meetings 
pursuant to Section 11125 shall be notified 
by the presiding officer of the state body, or 
a designee thereof, one hour prior to the 
emergency meeting by telephone. Notice 
shall also be made available on the Internet 
as soon as is practicable after the decision to 
call the emergency meeting has been made. 
If telephone services are not functioning, the 
notice requirements of this section shall be 
deemed waived, and the presiding officer of 
the state body, or a designee thereof, shall 
notify those newspapers, radio stations, or 
television stations of the fact of the holding 
of the emergency meeting, the purpose of 
the meeting, and any action taken at the 
meeting as soon after the meeting as 
possible. 

(d) The minutes of a meeting called 

pursuant to this section, a list of 
persons who the presiding officer of the state 
body, or a designee thereof, notified or 
attempted to notify, a copy of the rollcall 
vote, and any action taken at the meeting 

11.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

shall be posted for a minimum of 10 days in 
a public place, and also made available on 
the Internet for a minimum of 10 days, as 
soon after the meeting as possible. 

(Amended by Stats.1992, c. 1312 (A.B.2912), § 11, 
eff. Sept. 30, 1992; Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 6; 
Stats.1999, c. 393 (A.B.1234), § 3.) 

11125.6. Fish and Game 

Commission; emergency meetings;  
appeals of fishery closures or restrictions 

(a) An emergency meeting may be 

called at any time by the president of the 
Fish and Game Commission or by a majority 
of the members of the commission to 
consider an appeal of a closure of or 
restriction in a fishery adopted pursuant to 
Section 7710 of the Fish and Game Code. 
In the case of an emergency situation 
involving matters upon which prompt action 
is necessary due to the disruption or 
threatened disruption of an established 
fishery, the commission may hold an 
emergency meeting without complying with 
the 10-day notice requirement of Section 
11125 or the 48-hour notice requirement of 
Section 11125.4 if the delay necessitated by 
providing the 10-day notice of a public 
meeting required by Section 11125 or the 
48-hour notice required by Section 11125.4 
would significantly adversely impact the 
economic benefits of a fishery to the 
participants in the fishery and to the people 
of the state or significantly adversely impact 
the sustainability of a fishery managed by 
the state. 

(b) At the commencement of an 

emergency meeting called pursuant to this 
section, the commission shall make a 

finding in open session that the delay 
necessitated by providing notice 10 days 
prior to a meeting as required by Section 
11125 or 48 hours prior to a meeting as 
required by Section 11125.4 would 
significantly adversely impact the economic 
benefits of a fishery to the participants in the 
fishery and to the people of the state or 
significantly adversely impact the 
sustainability of a fishery managed by the 
state.  The finding shall set forth the specific 
facts that constitute the impact to the 
economic benefits of the fishery or the 
sustainability of the fishery.  The finding 
shall be adopted by a vote of at least four 
members of the commission, or, if less than 
four of the members are present, a 
unanimous vote of those members present. 
Failure to adopt the finding shall terminate 
the meeting. 

(c) Newspapers of general circulation 

and radio or television stations that have 
requested notice of meetings pursuant to 
Section 11125 shall be notified by the 
presiding officer of the commission, or a 
designee thereof, one hour prior to the 
emergency meeting by telephone. 

(d) The minutes of an emergency 

meeting called pursuant to this section, a list 
of persons who the president of the 
commission, or a designee thereof, notified 
or attempted to notify, a copy of the rollcall 
vote, and any action taken at the meeting 
shall be posted for a minimum of 10 days in 
a public place as soon after the meeting as 
possible. 

(Added by Stats.1998, c. 1052 (A.B.1241), S 21.) 

12.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

11125.7. Agenda item discussion 

before state body;  opportunity for public 
address;  regulation by state body; 
freedom of expression;  application of 
provisions 

(a) Except as otherwise provided in 
this section, the state body shall provide an 
opportunity for members of the public to 
directly address the state body on each 
agenda item before or during the state body's 
discussion or consideration of the item. This 
section is not applicable if the agenda item 
has already been considered by a committee 
composed exclusively of members of the 
state body at a public meeting where 
interested members of the public were 
afforded the opportunity to address the 
committee on the item, before or during the 
committee's consideration of the item, unless 
the item has been substantially changed 
since the committee heard the item, as 
determined by the state body. Every notice 
for a special meeting at which action is 
proposed to be taken on an item shall 
provide an opportunity for members of the 
public to directly address the state body 
concerning that item prior to action on the 
item. In addition, the notice requirement of 
Section 11125 shall not preclude the 
acceptance of testimony at meetings, other 
than emergency meetings, from members of 
the public if no action is taken by the state 
body at the same meeting on matters brought 
before the body by members of the public. 

(b) The state body may adopt 

reasonable regulations to ensure that the 
intent of subdivision (a) is carried out, 
including, but not limited to, regulations 

limiting the total amount of time allocated 
for public comment on particular issues and 
for each individual speaker. 

(c)(1) Notwithstanding subdivision 
(b), when a state body limits time for public 
comment the state body shall provide at least 
twice the allotted time to a member of the 
public who utilizes a translator to ensure that 
non-English speakers receive the same 
opportunity to directly address the state 
body. 

(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply if 

the state body utilizes simultaneous 
translation equipment in a manner that 
allows the state body to hear the translated 
public testimony simultaneously. 

(d) The state body shall not prohibit 
public criticism of the policies, programs, or 
services of the state body, or of the acts or 
omissions of the state body. Nothing in this 
subdivision shall confer any privilege or 
protection for expression beyond that 
otherwise provided by law. 

(e) This section is not applicable to 

closed sessions held pursuant to Section 
11126. 

(f) This section is not applicable to 

decisions regarding proceedings held 
pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with 
Section 11500), relating to administrative 
adjudication, or to the conduct of those 
proceedings. 

(g) This section is not applicable to 

hearings conducted by the California Victim 
Compensation and Government Claims 

13.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

Board pursuant to Sections 13963 and 
13963.1. 

(h) This section is not applicable to 
agenda items that involve decisions of the 
Public Utilities Commission regarding 
adjudicatory hearings held pursuant to 
Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 1701) 
of Part 1 of Division 1 of the Public Utilities 
Code. For all other agenda items, the 
commission shall provide members of the 
public, other than those who have already 
participated in the proceedings underlying 
the agenda item, an opportunity to directly 
address the commission before or during the 
commission's consideration of the item. 

(Added by Stats.1993, c. 1289 (S.B.367), § 2. 
Amended by Stats.1995, c. 938 (S.B.523), § 13, 
operative July 1, 1997; Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 
7; Stats.2006, c. 538 (S.B.1852), § 248; Stats.2012, c. 
551 (S.B.965), § 1.; Stats. 2016, c. 31 (S.B. 836), § 
71, eff. June 27, 2016.) 

11125.8. Hearings to consider 
crimes against minors or crimes of sexual 
assault or domestic violence;  
identification of applicant;  disclosure of 
nature of hearing 

(a) Notwithstanding Section 

11131.5, in any hearing that the State 
California Victim Compensation and 
Government Claims Board conducts 
pursuant to Section 13963.1 and that the 
applicant or applicant's representative does 
not request be open to the public, no notice, 
agenda, announcement, or report required 
under this article need identify the applicant. 

(b) In any hearing that the board 

conducts pursuant to Section 13963.1 and 
that the applicant or applicant's 
representative does not request be open to 
the public, the board shall disclose that the 
hearing is being held pursuant to Section 
13963.1.  That disclosure shall be deemed to 
satisfy the requirements of subdivision (a) of 
Section 11126.3. 

(Added by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 9.; 
Amended by Stats. 2006, c. 538 (S.B. 1852, § 249; 
Stats. 2016, c. 31 (S.B. 836), § 72, eff. June 27, 
2016.) 

11125.9. Regional water quality 

control boards;  compliance with 
notification guidelines 

Regional water quality control 

boards shall comply with the notification 
guidelines in Section 11125 and, in addition, 
shall do both of the following: 

(a) Notify, in writing, all clerks of 

the city councils and county boards of 
supervisors within the regional board's 
jurisdiction of any and all board hearings at 
least 10 days prior to the hearing.  
Notification shall include an agenda for the 
meeting with contents as described in 
subdivision (b) of Section 11125 as well as 
the name, address, and telephone number of 
any person who can provide further 
information prior to the meeting, but need 
not include a list of witnesses expected to 
appear at the meeting.  Each clerk, upon 
receipt of the notification of a board hearing, 
shall distribute the notice to all members of 
the respective city council or board of 

14.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

supervisors within the regional board's 
jurisdiction. 

(b) Notify, in writing, all newspapers 

with a circulation rate of at least 10,000 
within the regional board's jurisdiction of 
any and all board hearings, at least 10 days 
prior to the hearing.  Notification shall 
include an agenda for the meeting with 
contents as described in subdivision (b) of 
Section 11125 as well as the name, address, 
and telephone number of any person who 
can provide further information prior to the 
meeting, but need not include a list of 
witnesses expected to appear at the meeting. 

(Added by Stats.1997, c. 301 (A.B.116), § 1.) 

§ 11126. Closed sessions. 

(a)(1) Nothing in this article shall be 

construed to prevent a state body from 
holding closed sessions during a regular or 
special meeting to consider the appointment, 
employment, evaluation of performance, or 
dismissal of a public employee or to hear 
complaints or charges brought against that 
employee by another person or employee 
unless the employee requests a public 
hearing. 

(2) As a condition to holding a 
closed session on the complaints or charges 
to consider disciplinary action or to consider 
dismissal, the employee shall be given 
written notice of his or her right to have a 
public hearing, rather than a closed session, 
and that notice shall be delivered to the 
employee personally or by mail at least 24 
hours before the time for holding a regular 
or special meeting. If notice is not given, any 

disciplinary or other action taken against any 
employee at the closed session shall be null 
and void. 

(3) The state body also may exclude 

from any public or closed session, during the 
examination of a witness, any or all other 
witnesses in the matter being investigated by 
the state body. 

(4) Following the public hearing or 
closed session, the body may deliberate on 
the decision to be reached in a closed 
session. 

(b) For the purposes of this section, 

“employee” does not include any person 
who is elected to, or appointed to a public 
office by, any state body. However, officers 
of the California State University who 
receive compensation for their services, 
other than per diem and ordinary and 
necessary expenses, shall, when engaged in 
that capacity, be considered employees. 
Furthermore, for purposes of this section, 
the term employee includes a person exempt 
from civil service pursuant to subdivision (e) 
of Section 4 of Article VII of the California 
Constitution. 

(c) Nothing in this article shall be 

construed to do any of the following: 

(1) Prevent state bodies that 
administer the licensing of persons engaging 
in businesses or professions from holding 
closed sessions to prepare, approve, grade, 
or administer examinations. 

(2) Prevent an advisory body of a 

state body that administers the licensing of 

15.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

persons engaged in businesses or professions 
from conducting a closed session to discuss 
matters that the advisory body has found 
would constitute an unwarranted invasion of 
the privacy of an individual licensee or 
applicant if discussed in an open meeting, 
provided the advisory body does not include 
a quorum of the members of the state body it 
advises. Those matters may include review 
of an applicant's qualifications for licensure 
and an inquiry specifically related to the 
state body's enforcement program 
concerning an individual licensee or 
applicant where the inquiry occurs prior to 
the filing of a civil, criminal, or 
administrative disciplinary action against the 
licensee or applicant by the state body. 

(3) Prohibit a state body from 
holding a closed session to deliberate on a 
decision to be reached in a proceeding 
required to be conducted pursuant to 
Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) 
or similar provisions of law. 

(4) Grant a right to enter any 
correctional institution or the grounds of a 
correctional institution where that right is 
not otherwise granted by law, nor shall 
anything in this article be construed to 
prevent a state body from holding a closed 
session when considering and acting upon 
the determination of a term, parole, or 
release of any individual or other disposition 
of an individual case, or if public disclosure 
of the subjects under discussion or 
consideration is expressly prohibited by 
statute. 

or gifts, donations, and bequests that the 
donor or proposed donor has requested in 
writing to be kept confidential. 

(6) Prevent the Alcoholic Beverage 

Control Appeals Board from holding a 
closed session for the purpose of holding a 
deliberative conference as provided in 
Section 11125. 

(7)(A) Prevent a state body from 

holding closed sessions with its negotiator 
prior to the purchase, sale, exchange, or 
lease of real property by or for the state body 
to give instructions to its negotiator 
regarding the price and terms of payment for 
the purchase, sale, exchange, or lease. 

(B) However, prior to the closed 
session, the state body shall hold an open 
and public session in which it identifies the 
real property or real properties that the 
negotiations may concern and the person or 
persons with whom its negotiator may 
negotiate. 

(C) For purposes of this paragraph, 
the negotiator may be a member of the state 
body. 

(D) For purposes of this paragraph, 
“lease” includes renewal or renegotiation of 
a lease. 

(E) Nothing in this paragraph shall 

preclude a state body from holding a closed 
session for discussions regarding eminent 
domain proceedings pursuant to subdivision 
(e). 

(5) Prevent any closed session to 

consider the conferring of honorary degrees, 

(8) Prevent the California 

16.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

Postsecondary Education Commission from 
holding closed sessions to consider matters 
pertaining to the appointment or termination 
of the Director of the California 
Postsecondary Education Commission. 

(9) Prevent the Council for Private 
Postsecondary and Vocational Education 
from holding closed sessions to consider 
matters pertaining to the appointment or 
termination of the Executive Director of the 
Council for Private Postsecondary and 
Vocational Education. 

(10) Prevent the Franchise Tax 

Board from holding closed sessions for the 
purpose of discussion of confidential tax 
returns or information the public disclosure 
of which is prohibited by law, or from 
considering matters pertaining to the 
appointment or removal of the Executive 
Officer of the Franchise Tax Board. 

(11) Require the Franchise Tax 

Board to notice or disclose any confidential 
tax information considered in closed 
sessions, or documents executed in 
connection therewith, the public disclosure 
of which is prohibited pursuant to Article 2 
(commencing with Section 19542) of 
Chapter 7 of Part 10.2 of Division 2 of the 
Revenue and Taxation Code. 

(12) Prevent the Corrections 

Standards Authority from holding closed 
sessions when considering reports of crime 
conditions under Section 6027 of the Penal 
Code. 

(13) Prevent the State Air Resources 

Board from holding closed sessions when 
considering the proprietary specifications 

and performance data of manufacturers. 

(14) Prevent the State Board of 

Education or the Superintendent of Public 
Instruction, or any committee advising the 
board or the Superintendent, from holding 
closed sessions on those portions of its 
review of assessment instruments pursuant 
to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 
60600) of, or pursuant to Chapter 9 
(commencing with Section 60850) of, Part 
33 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Education 
Code during which actual test content is 
reviewed and discussed. The purpose of this 
provision is to maintain the confidentiality 
of the assessments under review. 

(15) Prevent the Department of 

Resources Recycling and Recovery or its 
auxiliary committees from holding closed 
sessions for the purpose of discussing 
confidential tax returns, discussing trade 
secrets or confidential or proprietary 
information in its possession, or discussing 
other data, the public disclosure of which is 
prohibited by law. 

(16) Prevent a state body that invests 

retirement, pension, or endowment funds 
from holding closed sessions when 
considering investment decisions. For 
purposes of consideration of shareholder 
voting on corporate stocks held by the state 
body, closed sessions for the purposes of 
voting may be held only with respect to 
election of corporate directors, election of 
independent auditors, and other financial 
issues that could have a material effect on 
the net income of the corporation. For the 
purpose of real property investment 
decisions that may be considered in a closed 

17.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

session pursuant to this paragraph, a state 
body shall also be exempt from the 
provisions of paragraph (7) relating to the 
identification of real properties prior to the 
closed session. 

(17) Prevent a state body, or boards, 

commissions, administrative officers, or 
other representatives that may properly be 
designated by law or by a state body, from 
holding closed sessions with its 
representatives in discharging its 
responsibilities under Chapter 10 
(commencing with Section 3500), Chapter 
10.3 (commencing with Section 3512), 
Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 
3525), or Chapter 10.7 (commencing with 
Section 3540) of Division 4 of Title 1 as the 
sessions relate to salaries, salary schedules, 
or compensation paid in the form of fringe 
benefits. For the purposes enumerated in the 
preceding sentence, a state body may also 
meet with a state conciliator who has 
intervened in the proceedings. 

(18)(A) Prevent a state body from 

holding closed sessions to consider matters 
posing a threat or potential threat of criminal 
or terrorist activity against the personnel, 
property, buildings, facilities, or equipment, 
including electronic data, owned, leased, or 
controlled by the state body, where 
disclosure of these considerations could 
compromise or impede the safety or security 
of the personnel, property, buildings, 
facilities, or equipment, including electronic 
data, owned, leased, or controlled by the 
state body. 

(B) Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, a state body, at any regular 

or special meeting, may meet in a closed 
session pursuant to subparagraph (A) upon a 
two-thirds vote of the members present at 
the meeting. 

(C) After meeting in closed session 

pursuant to subparagraph (A), the state body 
shall reconvene in open session prior to 
adjournment and report that a closed session 
was held pursuant to subparagraph (A), the 
general nature of the matters considered, and 
whether any action was taken in closed 
session. 

(D) After meeting in closed session 

pursuant to subparagraph (A), the state body 
shall submit to the Legislative Analyst 
written notification stating that it held this 
closed session, the general reason or reasons 
for the closed session, the general nature of 
the matters considered, and whether any 
action was taken in closed session. The 
Legislative Analyst shall retain for no less 
than four years any written notification 
received from a state body pursuant to this 
subparagraph. 

(19) Prevent the California Sex 
Offender Management Board from holding a 
closed session for the purpose of discussing 
matters pertaining to the application of a sex 
offender treatment provider for certification 
pursuant to Sections 290.09 and 9003 of the 
Penal Code. Those matters may include 
review of an applicant's qualifications for 
certification. 

(d)(1) Notwithstanding any other 

provision of law, any meeting of the Public 
Utilities Commission at which the rates of 
entities under the commission's jurisdiction 
are changed shall be open and public. 

18.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

(2) Nothing in this article shall be 

construed to prevent the Public Utilities 
Commission from holding closed sessions to 
deliberate on the institution of proceedings, 
or disciplinary actions against any person or 
entity under the jurisdiction of the 
commission. 

(e)(1) Nothing in this article shall be 
construed to prevent a state body, based on 
the advice of its legal counsel, from holding 
a closed session to confer with, or receive 
advice from, its legal counsel regarding 
pending litigation when discussion in open 
session concerning those matters would 
prejudice the position of the state body in 
the litigation. 

(2) For purposes of this article, all 
expressions of the lawyer-client privilege 
other than those provided in this subdivision 
are hereby abrogated. This subdivision is the 
exclusive expression of the lawyer-client 
privilege for purposes of conducting closed 
session meetings pursuant to this article. For 
purposes of this subdivision, litigation shall 
be considered pending when any of the 
following circumstances exist: 

significant exposure to litigation against the 
state body. 

(ii) Based on existing facts and 

circumstances, the state body is meeting 
only to decide whether a closed session is 
authorized pursuant to clause (i). 

(C)(i) Based on existing facts and 

circumstances, the state body has decided to 
initiate or is deciding whether to initiate 
litigation. 

(ii) The legal counsel of the state 

body shall prepare and submit to it a 
memorandum stating the specific reasons 
and legal authority for the closed session. If 
the closed session is pursuant to paragraph 
(1), the memorandum shall include the title 
of the litigation. If the closed session is 
pursuant to subparagraph (A) or (B), the 
memorandum shall include the existing facts 
and circumstances on which it is based. The 
legal counsel shall submit the memorandum 
to the state body prior to the closed session, 
if feasible, and in any case no later than one 
week after the closed session. The 
memorandum shall be exempt from 
disclosure pursuant to Section 6254.25. 

(A) An adjudicatory proceeding 

before a court, an administrative body 
exercising its adjudicatory authority, a 
hearing officer, or an arbitrator, to which the 
state body is a party, has been initiated 
formally. 

(iii) For purposes of this subdivision, 

“litigation” includes any adjudicatory 
proceeding, including eminent domain, 
before a court, administrative body 
exercising its adjudicatory authority, hearing 
officer, or arbitrator. 

(B)(i) A point has been reached 

where, in the opinion of the state body on 
the advice of its legal counsel, based on 
existing facts and circumstances, there is a 

(iv) Disclosure of a memorandum 

required under this subdivision shall not be 
deemed as a waiver of the lawyer-client 
privilege, as provided for under Article 3 

19.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

(commencing with Section 950) of Chapter 
4 of Division 8 of the Evidence Code. 

the applicant's qualifications. 

(f) In addition to subdivisions (a), 
(b), and (c), nothing in this article shall be 
construed to do any of the following: 

(1) Prevent a state body operating 

under a joint powers agreement for 
insurance pooling from holding a closed 
session to discuss a claim for the payment of 
tort liability or public liability losses 
incurred by the state body or any member 
agency under the joint powers agreement. 

(2) Prevent the examining committee 

established by the State Board of Forestry 
and Fire Protection, pursuant to Section 763 
of the Public Resources Code, from 
conducting a closed session to consider 
disciplinary action against an individual 
professional forester prior to the filing of an 
accusation against the forester pursuant to 
Section 11503. 

(3) Prevent the enforcement advisory 

committee established by the California 
Board of Accountancy pursuant to Section 
5020 of the Business and Professions Code 
from conducting a closed session to consider 
disciplinary action against an individual 
accountant prior to the filing of an 
accusation against the accountant pursuant 
to Section 11503. Nothing in this article 
shall be construed to prevent the 
qualifications examining committee 
established by the California Board of 
Accountancy pursuant to Section 5023 of the 
Business and Professions Code from 
conducting a closed hearing to interview an 
individual applicant or accountant regarding 

(4) Prevent a state body, as defined 
in subdivision (b) of Section 11121, from 
conducting a closed session to consider any 
matter that properly could be considered in 
closed session by the state body whose 
authority it exercises. 

(5) Prevent a state body, as defined 
in subdivision (d) of Section 11121, from 
conducting a closed session to consider any 
matter that properly could be considered in a 
closed session by the body defined as a state 
body pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) of 
Section 11121. 

(6) Prevent a state body, as defined 
in subdivision (c) of Section 11121, from 
conducting a closed session to consider any 
matter that properly could be considered in a 
closed session by the state body it advises. 

(7) Prevent the State Board of 

Equalization from holding closed sessions 
for either of the following: 

(A) When considering matters 
pertaining to the appointment or removal of 
the Executive Secretary of the State Board 
of Equalization. 

(B) For the purpose of hearing 

confidential taxpayer appeals or data, the 
public disclosure of which is prohibited by 
law. 

(8) Require the State Board of 
Equalization to disclose any action taken in 
closed session or documents executed in 
connection with that action, the public 

20.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

disclosure of which is prohibited by law 
pursuant to Sections 15619 and 15641 of 
this code and Sections 833, 7056, 8255, 
9255, 11655, 30455, 32455, 38705, 38706, 
43651, 45982, 46751, 50159, 55381, and 
60609 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

(9) Prevent the California 
Earthquake Prediction Evaluation Council, 
or other body appointed to advise the 
Director of Emergency Services or the 
Governor concerning matters relating to 
volcanic or earthquake predictions, from 
holding closed sessions when considering 
the evaluation of possible predictions. 

(g) This article does not prevent 

either of the following: 

(1) The Teachers' Retirement Board 
or the Board of Administration of the Public 
Employees' Retirement System from holding 
closed sessions when considering matters 
pertaining to the recruitment, appointment, 
employment, or removal of the chief 
executive officer or when considering 
matters pertaining to the recruitment or 
removal of the Chief Investment Officer of 
the State Teachers' Retirement System or the 
Public Employees' Retirement System. 

(2) The Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing from holding closed sessions 
when considering matters relating to the 
recruitment, appointment, or removal of its 
executive director. 

(h) This article does not prevent the 

Board of Administration of the Public 
Employees' Retirement System from holding 
closed sessions when considering matters 

relating to the development of rates and 
competitive strategy for plans offered 
pursuant to Chapter 15 (commencing with 
Section 21660) of Part 3 of Division 5 of 
Title 2. 

(i) This article does not prevent the 

Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board 
from holding closed sessions when 
considering matters related to the 
development of rates and contracting 
strategy for entities contracting or seeking to 
contract with the board, entities with which 
the board is considering a contract, or 
entities with which the board is considering 
or enters into any other arrangement under 
which the board provides, receives, or 
arranges services or reimbursement, 
pursuant to Part 6.2 (commencing with 
Section 12693), Part 6.3 (commencing with 
Section 12695), Part 6.4 (commencing with 
Section 12699.50), Part 6.5 (commencing 
with Section 12700), Part 6.6 (commencing 
with Section 12739.5), or Part 6.7 
(commencing with Section 12739.70) of 
Division 2 of the Insurance Code. 

(j) Nothing in this article shall be 

construed to prevent the board of the State 
Compensation Insurance Fund from holding 
closed sessions in the following: 

(1) When considering matters related 

to claims pursuant to Chapter 1 
(commencing with Section 3200) of 
Division 4 of the Labor Code, to the extent 
that confidential medical information or 
other individually identifiable information 
would be disclosed. 

(2) To the extent that matters related 

21.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

to audits and investigations that have not 
been completed would be disclosed. 

(3) To the extent that an internal 
audit containing proprietary information 
would be disclosed. 

(4) To the extent that the session 
would address the development of rates, 
contracting strategy, underwriting, or 
competitive strategy, pursuant to the powers 
granted to the board in Chapter 4 
(commencing with Section 11770) of Part 3 
of Division 2 of the Insurance Code, when 
discussion in open session concerning those 
matters would prejudice the position of the 
State Compensation Insurance Fund. 

(k) The State Compensation 

Insurance Fund shall comply with the 
procedures specified in Section 11125.4 of 
the Government Code with respect to any 
closed session or meeting authorized by 
subdivision (j), and in addition shall provide 
an opportunity for a member of the public to 
be heard on the issue of the appropriateness 
of closing the meeting or session. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1968, c. 1272, p. 2396, § 1; 
Stats.1970, c. 346, p. 741, § 5; Stats.1972, c. 431, p. 
791, § 43; Stats.1972, c. 1010, p. 1872, § 63, eff. 
Aug. 17, 1972, operative July 1, 1972; Stats.1974, c. 
1254, p. 2713, § 1; Stats.1974, c. 1539, p. 3525, § 1; 
Stats.1975, c. 197, p. 570, § 1; Stats.1975, c. 959, p. 
2238, § 5; Stats.1977, c. 730, p. 2318, § 5, eff. Sept. 
12, 1977; Stats.1980, c. 1197, p. 4043, § 1; 
Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4338, § 11; Stats.1981, c. 180, 
p. 1096, § 1; Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3688, § 12; 
Stats.1982, c. 454, p. 1842, § 40; Stats.1983, c. 143, 
§ 187; Stats.1984, c. 678, § 1; Stats.1984, c. 1284, § 
4; Stats.1985, c. 186, § 1; Stats.1985, c. 1091, § 1; 
Stats.1986, c. 575, § 1; Stats.1987, c. 1320, § 2; 

Stats.1988, c. 1448, § 29; Stats.1989, c. 177, § 2; 
Stats.1989, c. 882, § 2; Stats.1989, c. 1360, § 52; 
Stats.1989, c. 1427, § 1, eff. Oct. 2, 1989, operative 
Jan. 1, 1990; Stats.1991, c. 788 (A.B.1440), § 4; 
Stats.1992, c. 1050 (A.B.2987), § 17; Stats.1994, c. 
26 (A.B.1807), § 230, eff. March 30, 1994; 
Stats.1994, c. 422 (A.B.2589), § 15.5, eff. Sept. 7, 
1994; Stats.1994, c. 845 (S.B.1316), § 1; Stats.1995, 
c. 975 (A.B.265), § 3; Stats.1996, c. 1041 
(A.B.3358), § 2; Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 8; 
Stats.1998, c. 210 (S.B.2008), § 1; Stats.1998, c. 972 
(S.B.989), § 1; Stats.1999, c. 735 (S.B.366), § 9, eff. 
Oct. 10, 1999; Stats.2000, c. 1002 (S.B.1998), § 1; 
Stats.2000, c. 1055 (A.B.2889), § 30, eff. Sept. 30, 
2000; Stats.2001, c. 21 (S.B.54), § 1, eff. June 25, 
2001; Stats.2001, c. 243 (A.B.192), § 10; Stats.2002, 
c; 664 (A.B.3034), § 93.7; Stats.2002, c. 1113 
(A.B.2072), § 1; Stats.2005, c. 288 (A.B.277), § 1; 
Stats.2007, c. 577 (A.B.1750), § 4, eff. Oct. 13, 2007; 
Stats.2008, c. 179 (S.B.1498), § 91; Stats.2008, c. 
344 (S.B.1145), § 3, eff. Sept. 26, 2008; Stats.2010, 
c. 328 (S.B.1330), § 81; Stats.2010, c. 32 
(A.B.1887), § 2, eff. June 29, 2010; Stats.2010, c. 
618 (A.B.2791), § 124; Stats.2011, c. 357 (A.B.813), 
§ 1; Stats.2013, c. 352 (A.B.1317), § 234, eff. Sept. 
26, 2013, operative July 1, 2013.) 

11126.1. Record of topics discussed 

and decisions made at closed sessions;  
availability 

The state body shall designate a clerk 

or other officer or employee of the state 
body, who shall then attend each closed 
session of the state body and keep and enter 
in a minute book a record of topics 
discussed and decisions made at the 
meeting.  The minute book made pursuant to 
this section is not a public record subject to 
inspection pursuant to the California Public 
Records Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with 
Section 6250) of Division 7 of Title 1), and 
shall be kept confidential.  The minute book 
shall be available to members of the state 

22.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

body or, if a violation of this chapter is 
alleged to have occurred at a closed session, 
to a court of general jurisdiction.  Such 
minute book may, but need not, consist of a 
recording of the closed session. 

(Added by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4340, § 12. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3691, § 13.) 

11126.2. Closed session; response 

to confidential final draft audit report; 
public release of report 

(a) Nothing in this article shall be 
construed to prohibit a state body that has 
received a confidential final draft audit 
report from the Bureau of State Audits from 
holding closed sessions to discuss its 
response to that report. 

(b) After the public release of an 

audit report by the Bureau of State Audits, if 
a state body meets to discuss the audit 
report, it shall do so in an open session 
unless exempted from that requirement by 
some other provision of law. 

(Added by Stats.2004, c. 576 (A.B.1827), § 2.) 

11126.3. Disclosure of nature of 
items to be discussed in closed session; 
scope of session; notice of meeting; 
announcement of pending litigation; 
unnecessary disclosures; disclosures at 
open session following closed session 

(a) Prior to holding any closed 

session, the state body shall disclose, in an 
open meeting, the general nature of the item 
or items to be discussed in the closed 

session. The disclosure may take the form of 
a reference to the item or items as they are 
listed by number or letter on the agenda. If 
the session is closed pursuant to paragraph 
(2) of subdivision (d) of Section 11126, the 
state body shall state the title of, or 
otherwise specifically identify, the 
proceeding or disciplinary action 
contemplated. However, should the body 
determine that to do so would jeopardize the 
body's ability to effectuate service of process 
upon one or more unserved parties if the 
proceeding or disciplinary action is 
commenced or that to do so would fail to 
protect the private economic and business 
reputation of the person or entity if the 
proceeding or disciplinary action is not 
commenced, then the state body shall notice 
that there will be a closed session and 
describe in general terms the purpose of that 
session. If the session is closed pursuant to 
subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) of 
subdivision (e) of Section 11126, the state 
body shall state the title of, or otherwise 
specifically identify, the litigation to be 
discussed unless the body states that to do so 
would jeopardize the body's ability to 
effectuate service of process upon one or 
more unserved parties, or that to do so 
would jeopardize its ability to conclude 
existing settlement negotiations to its 
advantage. 

(b) In the closed session, the state 

body may consider only those matters 
covered in its disclosure. 

(c) The disclosure shall be made as 
part of the notice provided for the meeting 
pursuant to Section 11125 or pursuant to 
subdivision (a) of Section 92032 of the 

23.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

Education Code and of any order or notice 
required by Section 11129. 

(d) If, after the agenda has been 

published in compliance with this article, 
any pending litigation (under subdivision (e) 
of Section 11126) matters arise, the 
postponement of which will prevent the state 
body from complying with any statutory, 
court-ordered, or other legally imposed 
deadline, the state body may proceed to 
discuss those matters in closed session and 
shall publicly announce in the meeting the 
title of, or otherwise specifically identify, the 
litigation to be discussed, unless the body 
states that to do so would jeopardize the 
body's ability to effectuate service of process 
upon one or more unserved parties, or that to 
do so would jeopardize its ability to 
conclude existing settlement negotiations to 
its advantage. Such an announcement shall 
be deemed to comply fully with the 
requirements of this section. 

(e) Nothing in this section shall 
require or authorize a disclosure of names or 
other information that would constitute an 
invasion of privacy or otherwise 
unnecessarily divulge the particular facts 
concerning the closed session or the 
disclosure of which is prohibited by state or 
federal law. 

(f) After any closed session, the state 
body shall reconvene into open session prior 
to adjournment and shall make any reports, 
provide any documentation, and make any 
other disclosures required by Section 
11125.2 of action taken in the closed 
session. 

(g) The announcements required to 

be made in open session pursuant to this 
section may be made at the location 
announced in the agenda for the closed 
session, as long as the public is allowed to 
be present at that location for the purpose of 
hearing the announcement. 

(Added by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4341, § 13. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3692, § 14; 
Stats.1987, c. 1320, § 3.  Amended by 
Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 10; Stats.1998, c. 210 
(S.B.2008), § 2; Stats.2001, c. 243 (A.B.192), § 11.) 

11126.4.  Closed sessions of 

Gambling Control Commission; 
information prohibited from being 
disclosed by law or tribal-state gaming 
compact; limitations; public notice 

(a)  Nothing in this article shall be 

construed to prevent the California 
Gambling Control Commission from 
holding a closed session when discussing 
matters involving trade secrets, nonpublic 
financial data, confidential or proprietary 
information, and other date and information, 
the public disclosure of which is prohibited 
by law or a tribal-state gaming compact. 

(b)  Discussion in closed session 

authorized by this section shall be limited to 
the confidential data and information related 
to the agendized item and shall not include 
discussion of any other information or 
matter. 

(c)  Before going into closed session 
the commission shall publicly announce the 
type of data or information to be discussed 
in closed session, which shall be recorded 
upon the commission minutes. 

24.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

(d)  Action taken on agenda items 
discussed pursuant to this section shall be 
taken in open session. 

(Added by Stats. 2005, c. 274 (S.B. 919), § 1.) 

11126.5. Disorderly conduct of 

general public during meeting;  clearing 
of room 

In the event that any meeting is 
willfully interrupted by a group or groups of 
persons so as to render the orderly conduct 
of such meeting unfeasible and order cannot 
be restored by the removal of individuals 
who are willfully interrupting the meeting 
the state body conducting the meeting may 
order the meeting room cleared and continue 
in session.  Nothing in this section shall 
prohibit the state body from establishing a 
procedure for readmitting an individual or 
individuals not responsible for willfully 
disturbing the orderly conduct of the 
meeting.  Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, only matters appearing on 
the agenda may be considered in such a 
session. Representatives of the press or other 
news media, except those participating in the 
disturbance, shall be allowed to attend any 
session held pursuant to this section. 

(Added by Stats.1970, c. 1610, p. 3385, § 1. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3692, § 
15.) 

11126.7. Fees 

No fees may be charged by a state 

body for providing a notice required by 
Section 11125 or for carrying out any 
provision of this article, except as 
specifically authorized pursuant to this 
article. 

(Added by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4341, § 14. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3692, § 16.) 

11127. Application of article 

Each provision of this article shall 

apply to every state body unless the body is 
specifically excepted from that provision by 
law or is covered by any other conflicting 
provision of law. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3692, § 17.) 

11128. Time of closed session 

Each closed session of a state body 

shall be held only during a regular or special 
meeting of the body. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4341, § 15;  
Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3692, § 18.) 

11128.5. Adjournment; 

declaration;  notice;  hour for reconvened 
meeting 

The state body may adjourn any 

regular, adjourned regular, special, or 
adjourned special meeting to a time and 
place specified in the order of adjournment.  
Less than a quorum may so adjourn from 
time to time.  If all members are absent from 

25.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

any regular or adjourned regular meeting, 
the clerk or secretary of the state body may 
declare the meeting adjourned to a stated 
time and place and he or she shall cause a 
written notice of the adjournment to be 
given in the same manner as provided in 
Section 11125.4 for special meetings, unless 
that notice is waived as provided for special 
meetings.  A copy of the order or notice of 
adjournment shall be conspicuously posted 
on or near the door of the place where the 
regular, adjourned regular, special, or 
adjourned special meeting was held within 
24 hours after the time of the adjournment. 
When a regular or adjourned regular meeting 
is adjourned as provided in this section, the 
resulting adjourned regular meeting is a 
regular meeting for all purposes.  When an 
order of adjournment of any meeting fails to 
state the hour at which the adjourned 
meeting is to be held, it shall be held at the 
hour specified for regular meetings by law or 
regulation. 

(Added by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 11.) 

11129. Continuance;  posting 

notice 

Any hearing being held, or noticed or 

ordered to be held by a state body at any 
meeting may by order or notice of 
continuance be continued or recontinued to 
any subsequent meeting of the state body in 
the same manner and to the same extent set 
forth in Section 11128.5 for the adjournment 
of meetings.  A copy of the order or notice 
of continuance shall be conspicuously 
posted on or near the door of the place 
where the hearing was held within 24 hours 

after the time of the continuance;  provided, 
that if the hearing is continued to a time less 
than 24 hours after the time specified in the 
order or notice of hearing, a copy of the 
order or notice of continuance of hearing 
shall be posted immediately following the 
meeting at which the order or declaration of 
continuance was adopted or made. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3692, § 19. 
Amended by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 12.) 

11130. Actions to prevent 
violations or determine applicability of 
article; validity of rules discouraging 
expression; audio recording of closed 
sessions; discovery procedures for 
recordings 

(a) The Attorney General, the district 

attorney, or any interested person may 
commence an action by mandamus, 
injunction, or declaratory relief for the 
purpose of stopping or preventing violations 
or threatened violations of this article or to 
determine the applicability of this article to 
past actions or threatened future action by 
members of the state body or to determine 
whether any rule or action by the state body 
to penalize or otherwise discourage the 
expression of one or more of its members is 
valid or invalid under the laws of this state 
or of the United States, or to compel the 
state body to audio record its closed sessions 
as hereinafter provided. 

(b) The court in its discretion may, 
upon a judgment of a violation of Section 
11126, order the state body to audio record 
its closed sessions and preserve the audio 

26.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

recordings for the period and under the 
terms of security and confidentiality the 
court deems appropriate. 

(ii) An affidavit that contains specific 

facts indicating that a violation of the act 
occurred in the closed session. 

(c)(1) Each recording so kept shall be 

immediately labeled with the date of the 
closed session recorded and the title of the 
clerk or other officer who shall be custodian 
of the recording. 

(2) The audio recordings shall be 

subject to the following discovery 
procedures: 

(A) In any case in which discovery or 

disclosure of the audio recording is sought 
by the Attorney General, the district 
attorney, or the plaintiff in a civil action 
pursuant to this section or Section 11130.3 
alleging that a violation of this article has 
occurred in a closed session that has been 
recorded pursuant to this section, the party 
seeking discovery or disclosure shall file a 
written notice of motion with the appropriate 
court with notice to the governmental 
agency that has custody and control of the 
audio recording. The notice shall be given 
pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 1005 
of the Code of Civil Procedure. 

(B) The notice shall include, in 

addition to the items required by Section 
1010 of the Code of Civil Procedure, all of 
the following: 

(i) Identification of the proceeding in 
which discovery or disclosure is sought, the 
party seeking discovery or disclosure, the 
date and time of the meeting recorded, and 
the governmental agency that has custody 
and control of the recording. 

(3) If the court, following a review of 
the motion, finds that there is good cause to 
believe that a violation has occurred, the 
court may review, in camera, the recording 
of that portion of the closed session alleged 
to have violated the act. 

(4) If, following the in camera 

review, the court concludes that disclosure 
of a portion of the recording would be likely 
to materially assist in the resolution of the 
litigation alleging violation of this article, 
the court shall, in its discretion, make a 
certified transcript of the portion of the 
recording a public exhibit in the proceeding. 

(5) Nothing in this section shall 
permit discovery of communications that are 
protected by the attorney-client privilege. 

(Added by Stats.1967, c. 1656, p. 4026, § 122. 
Amended by Stats.1969, c. 494, p. 1106, § 1; 
Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3693, § 20; Stats.1997, c. 949 
(S.B.95), § 13; Stats.1999, c. 393 (A.B.1234), § 4; 
Stats.2009, c. 88 (A.B.176), § 43.) 

11130.3. Judicial determination 
action by state body in violation of §§ 
11123 or 11125 null and void; action by 
interested person; grounds 

(a) Any interested person may 

commence an action by mandamus, 
injunction, or declaratory relief for the 
purpose of obtaining a judicial determination 
that an action taken by a state body in 
violation of Section 11123 or 11125 is null 

27.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

and void under this section. Any action 
seeking such a judicial determination shall 
be commenced within 90 days from the date 
the action was taken. Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to prevent a state body 
from curing or correcting an action 
challenged pursuant to this section. 

(b) An action shall not be determined 

to be null and void if any of the following 
conditions exist: 

(1) The action taken was in 

connection with the sale or issuance of 
notes, bonds, or other evidences of 
indebtedness or any contract, instrument, or 
agreement related thereto. 

(2) The action taken gave rise to a 
contractual obligation upon which a party 
has, in good faith, detrimentally relied. 

(3) The action taken was in 
substantial compliance with Sections 11123 
and 11125. 

(4) The action taken was in 
connection with the collection of any tax. 

(Amended by Stats.1999, c. 393 (A.B.1234), § 5.) 

personal liability of any public officer or 
employee thereof. 

A court may award court costs and 
reasonable attorney's fees to a defendant in 
any action brought pursuant to Section 
11130 or 11130.3 where the defendant has 
prevailed in a final determination of the 
action and the court finds that the action was 
clearly frivolous and totally lacking in merit. 

(Added by Stats.1975, c. 959, p. 2240, § 6.  Amended 
by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3693, § 21;  Stats.1985, c. 
936, § 2.) 

11130.7. Violations;  misdemeanor 

Each member of a state body who 

attends a meeting of that body in violation of 
any provision of this article, and where the 
member intends to deprive the public of 
information to which the member knows or 
has reason to know the public is entitled 
under this article, is guilty of a 
misdemeanor. 

(Added by Stats.1980, c. 1284, p. 4341, § 16. 
Amended by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3693, § 22. 
Amended by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B. 95), § 14.) 

11130.5. Court costs and attorney 

fees 

11131. Use of facility allowing 

discrimination;  state agency 

A court may award court costs and 
reasonable attorney's fees to the plaintiff in 
an action brought pursuant to Section 11130 
or 11130.3 where it is found that a state 
body has violated the provisions of this 
article.  The costs and fees shall be paid by 
the state body and shall not become a 

No state agency shall conduct any 

meeting, conference, or other function in any 
facility that prohibits the admittance of any 
person, or persons, on the basis of ancestry, 
or any characteristic listed or defined in 
Section 11135 or that is inaccessible to 
disabled persons, or where members of the 

28.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAGLEY-KEENE OPEN MEETING ACT – 2017
 
(CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE)
 

public may not be present without making a 
payment or purchase.  As used in this 
section, "state agency" means and includes 
every state body, office, officer, department, 
division, bureau, board, council, 
commission, or other state agency. 

(Added by Stats.1970, c. 383, p. 798, § 1.  Amended 
by Stats.1981, c. 968, p. 3693, § 23.  Amended by 
Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 15.; Stats. 2007, c. 568 
(A.B. 14), § 32.) 

11131.5. Identity of victims or 

alleged victims of crimes, tortious sexual 
conduct, or child abuse;  public disclosure 

No notice, agenda, announcement, or 

report required under this article need 
identify any victim or alleged victim of 
crime, tortious sexual conduct, or child 
abuse unless the identity of the person has 
been publicly disclosed. 

(Added by Stats.1997, c. 949 (S.B.95), § 16.) 

11132. Closed session by state 

body prohibited 

Except as expressly authorized by 

this article, no closed session may be held by 
any state body. 

(Added by Stats.1987, c. 1320, § 4.) 

29.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
