Guide to Creative
Commons for Scholarly 
Publications and 
Educational Resources

Photo by: Martin Adams on Unsplash

2

Contents 

1.  About this guide 

2.  About copyright and Creative Commons 

3.  About Creative Commons licences 

4.  Questions about process 

5.  Questions about open access books 

6.  Questions about repercussions for scholarship 

7.  Questions about derivatives and reuse (CC BY) 

8.  Questions about commercial use (CC BY-NC) 

9.  Open Educational Resources and Creative 

Commons licences 

Glossary 

Acknowledgements 

3

5   

7

11

13

15  

17 

19

21 

23

24 

 
3

1

About this guide 

This guide wants to inform researchers about the 
Creative Commons (CC) licence system. What licence 
to choose when publishing a paper or book or sharing 
an article through a repository? And what licence to 
apply when sharing your  teaching materials? The guide 
wants to help choose the right licence by addressing 
several frequently asked questions and common  
concerns expressed by about the use of CC licences. 

Ever since the first definitions of open access were 
drafted, back in the early 2000s, Open Access was not 
only about the free availability of publications to read. 
It was also about reusing. The Budapest Open Access 
Initiative (2002) stated: 

“by ‘open access’ [...] we mean its free availability on the 
public internet, permitting any users to read, download, 
copy, distribute, print, search, or link to the full texts 
of these articles, crawl them for indexing, pass them 
as data to software, or use them for any other lawful 
purpose, without financial, legal, or technical barriers 
other than those inseparable from gaining access to the 
internet itself.” 

CC licences have been developed to provide a clear 
legal framework to underpin the open online sharing 
and reuse of creative works. For researchers this often 
means scholarly papers, books or chapters. When you 
publish ‘open access’ most publishers will ask you to 
choose a CC licence for your work. Increasingly, also 
funders have requirements as to which CC licence has 
to be applied, because they want to make sure that the 
research they fund is reused as widely as possible. 

This guide is adapted from a guide that was written a 
few years ago for researchers based in the UK. We  
have updated it such that we hope it will be useful for 
researchers in the Netherlands. Whenever useful we 
refer specifically to the Dutch context.

Creative Commons

Creative Commons (CC) is an international 
not-for-profit organisation publicly launched 
in December 2002 that aims to improve clarity 
about what people can do with published  
content. For researchers, this generally means 
academic books or journal articles, but CC 
licences are used by all kinds of content  
creators – photographers, musicians, artists, 
Wikipedia contributors and people collecting 
data, to give just a few examples. The CC licences 
are in constant development – the licences are 
now on version 4.0 which was launched in 2013.

More information about open access in the  
Netherlands and funder requirements can be found 
on www.openaccess.nl and the websites of NWO, 
ZonMw or the European Commission.

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

4

Photo by: Annie Spratt on Unsplash

5

2

About copyright
and Creative Commons 
licences

CC licences are not an alternative to copyright. In fact, 
they are built on copyright and similar rights and last 
for the same length of term as these rights. The licences 
enable rights holders to specify a standard set of terms 
and conditions regarding sharing and reuse that will 
best suit their needs, while ensuring that the authors  
are credited for their work.  

2.1

What is copyright? 

Copyright is the exclusive right, held by the creator 
(author) of a work, to reproduce, publish, modify and 
distribute or sell copies of that work. Without the  
creator’s permission, third parties are not allowed to do 
this; except for some specific and limited uses provided 
by statutory exemptions in the Dutch Copyright Act 
(Auteurswet). Copyright arises automatically as  
soon as a work is created. For academic work (academic 
output), this usually means as soon as it is written. No 
application or registration is necessary. Throughout the 
European Union, copyright will remain with the creators 
during their life and for at least 70 years after their death. 

Copyright can be transferred to a third party (a private 
individual or a legal person like a publishing company) 
by the creator in a written contract or an assignment. 

With a CC licence on a work the creator can – without 
transferring copyright – grant certain permissions to use 
a work, whether or not under specific conditions, 
directly to a third party. This is on top of the rights, e.g. 
quotation and educational use, that already exist in the 
Dutch Copyright Act. It is often very difficult for a third 
party to understand copyright exceptions, to find out 
who the current copyright holder is and how to contact 
them to ask for permissions. 

2.2

Copyright and publishers
contracts

When you want to publish your work with a publisher, 
the publisher has to get your permission to reproduce, 
publish, distribute and archive the work in print and 
electronic form. To be able to do so the publisher may 
ask you to transfer your copyrights or to grant a licence 
to publish. 

With a Transfer of Copyright Agreement, the author 
transfers (all) their rights of the work to the publisher, 
including those pertaining to electronic forms and 
transmissions, and can no longer exercise control over 
how the publisher uses those rights. On the other hand 

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

  
 
6

2. About copyright and Creative Commons licences

in a Licence to Publish, the author retains copyright and 
licences specific rights to the publisher, thus maintaining 
control over their rights that have not been granted. 

A Licence to Publish can be exclusive or non-exclusive. 
For the author (licensor) granting an exclusive licence 
will in most cases have the same result as a transfer 
of copyright: the specific rights have been exclusively 
granted to the publisher (licensee); the licensor can no 
longer exercise them. That is why it is important to grant 
a non-exclusive licence. With a non-exclusive licence, 
such as a CC licence, you can grant all licensees specific 
rights with a standard contract.

Please note that some publishers ask you to transfer 
your copyrights or assign exclusive rights to be able 
for them to grant a CC licence. If you have a choice 
we recommend not to do so. By transferring copyright 
or granting an exclusive licence, you will no longer be 
in the position to exercise specific rights yourself. For 
instance, if the publisher owns your commercial rights, 
you would have to ask the publisher permission,  
and in most cases pay the publisher, to be able to  
add your publication to a printed course reader and 
charge for it. 

2.3

Rights usually reserved to  
the author after signing a 
publishing contract  

Usually, certain rights remain reserved to authors or are 
granted by publishers in a standard contract, whether 
based on a Transfer of Copyright Agreement or an  
exclusive Licence to Publish. These are: 
• 

the right to make further copies of all or part of  
the work for private use and classroom teaching. 
the right to reuse all or part of the work in a  
compilation of a work or text book of which you  
are the author.
the right to make copies of the published work 
for internal distribution within the institution that 
employs you. 

• 

• 

If a publisher does not expressly allow the author to 
exercise those rights as standard in the contract, the 
author will have to seek permission.

By law, some copyrights cannot be transferred. E.g.  
you will always keep the right based on article 25fa 
Dutch Copyright Act to make short scientific works 
freely available to the public after a reasonable period  
of time, if they are the result of research funded with 
Dutch public money. See for more information the  
initiative You share, we take care! by the Dutch  
university libraries.

Retaining your rights

Authors can always try to retain more rights over the work through negotiation with the publisher. For 
that purpose SPARC has developed an Author Addendum that can be added to your paper at submission. 

In addition, cOAlition S has announced its Rights Retention Strategy, that aims is to empower researchers 
funded by cOAlition S to retain control over their work. This strategy will allow authors to publish in their 
journal of choice, including subscription journals, while retaining the right to self-archive the author’s 
accepted manuscript of their papers immediately upon publication under a CC BY licence. 

 
7

3

About Creative
Commons licences

CC licences provide everyone from individual  
creators to large institutions a standardized way to 
grant the public permission to use their creative work 
under copyright law. From the reuser’s perspective, a 
CC licence on a copyrighted work answers the ques-
tion, “What can I do with this work?”.1  The licence is 
expressed in three forms: the legal code (the licence 
itself); a human-readable deed summarising the  
principal terms and conditions of the licence, and a 
machine-readable form that computers can parse to 
identify the key licence features.

•  your funder might require you to choose a specific 
CC licence (e.g. cOAlition S funders require the use 
of CC BY or, exceptionally, CC BY-ND). 

Unless your choice of a licence is predetermined by 
your funder’s requirements, the best way to choose 
which licence is most suitable for your work is to think 
of how you want your work to be distributed and used 
by others, which types of reuses you want to encourage 
and which ones you would like to prevent. Need help 
choosing a licence? Try this Licence Chooser.

There are six CC licences, as shown in the table below. 
These licences consist of different combinations of four 
elements: Attribution (BY), Share Alike (SA), Non-Com-
mercial (NC) and No Derivatives (ND). All CC licences 
require Attribution, i.e. crediting the original author. All 
CC licences should be used unamended. One of the six 
can be chosen, after which they are irrevocable. 

3.1

Choosing a Licence 

Things to consider and check in advance when  
publishing academic works:
•  usually publishers, preprint servers and repositories 
present a limited number of CC licences (e.g. you 
could be given a choice between CC BY and CC 
BY-NC-ND), 

1  This paragraph is reproduced from About CC Licenses. Licensed
  under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license. 

https://creativecommons.org/about/cclicenses/

Book is a treasure of knowledge...  
by Rupa Panda is licensed under CC BY 2.0

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

 
 
8

3. About Creative Commons licences

CREATIVE COMMONS LICENCES 2

Licence designation

Licence name

What does this mean for you as an author?

CC BY

Attribution

The most liberal of the CC licences apart from CC0 Public Domain 

CC BY-SA

Attribution

ShareAlike

Dedication. This licence allows others to distribute, remix, tweak, 

and build upon a work – also commercially – provided they 

credit the author for the original creation and clearly indicate that 

changes were made to the work, if any.

Similar to CC BY; however, others must licence new creations 

under identical terms. Therefore, all new works reusing (parts of) 

such work will need to carry the same licence and any derivatives 

will also allow commercial use.3 

CC BY-ND

Attribution

NoDerivatives

This licence allows for redistribution, commercial and non-com-

mercial, provided it is passed along unchanged and in whole, with 

credit to the author.

CC BY-NC

Attribution

With this licence others must not remix, tweak, or build upon the 

Non-Commercial

original work for commercial purposes. Although new works must 

also acknowledge the author and be non-commercial, reusers do 

not have to licence their derivative works on the same terms.

CC BY-NC-SA

Attribution

This licence lets others remix, tweak, and build upon the author’s 

Non-Commercial

work non-commercially, provided they credit the author and 

ShareAlike

licence their new creations under the identical terms.

CC BY-NC-ND

Attribution

This is the most restrictive of the six licences, only allowing others 

Non-Commercial

to download works and share them with others as long as they 

NoDerivatives

credit the author, but they cannot change them in any way or use 

them commercially.

2  This table is reproduced with small alterations from Martin Paul Eve,
  Open Access and the Humanities: Contexts, Controversies and the 
Future (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014) http://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/CBO9781316161012. Licensed under a CC BY license. We 
have merged two columns and changed the text slightly. 

3  The ShareAlike condition applies only to derivative works, not to
  collections. Including a CC BY-SA licensed work in a collection does 
not produce an adaptation, so the collection does not have to be 
licensed via a CC BY-SA. 

9

Examples of reuse allowed 
under a CC BY licence 4

•  Distribute the full-text of a publication freely 

to students or colleagues.

•  Copy a text for indexing or text mining  

• 

purposes for commercial and non-commercial 
purposes.
Include the full-text of a publication in a 
repository (e.g. institutional repository) or 
upload it on academic social networks.
•  Combine parts of a work, along with other 
openly licensed resources, into a collection 
(e.g. a student handbook or textbook). 
•  Translate a work into another language.
•  Modify tables and charts contained in a 
journal article and reproduce them in a  
new publication.

Tablet use 2 by ebayink 
is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 

NB: Crediting the original work, indicating whether 
changes have been made, stating the licence under 
which the work is licensed and linking to it is  
mandatory for all types of reuse described in the  
box above.

3.2

Why is CC BY encouraged by 
open access proponents?  

In addition to the licences above Creative Commons 
has also developed a tool (CC0 Public Domain Dedica-
tion) by which you can dedicate creations to the public 
domain. The dedication is done through legal code 
hosted by Creative Commons (just as the licences are) 
in which you waive all copyright and related rights, such 
as your moral rights – to the extent they are waivable 
– that you have over your work. Once this has been 
done, anybody who reuses or builds on your work does 
not have to credit you, although citation is encouraged. 
The tool may be of use in certain situations, particularly 
pertaining to research data such as raw data sets. Before 
using CC0, you will need to ensure that all rights holders 
of the work give consent, as the dedication to the public 
domain is irrevocable. For further information on CC0 
please visit http://creativecommons.org/about/cc0 

Open access publishing aims to make research  
publications available for anyone to read and reuse.  
The Budapest Open Access Initiative (2002) – a key 
driver of open access developments in Europe – has 
recommended CC BY as the preferred licence for open 
access publication. CC licences are used because they 
offer an internationally established legal structure that is 
aligned with the aims of open access. As shown in the 
table, CC BY is the most permissive CC licence, allowing 
sharing, commercial reuse and modification as long as 
the original author is credited and it is clearly indicated if 
changes were made to the original work. Its proponents 
argue that this gives users the greatest possible degree 
of flexibility, allowing published research to be used 
for commercial purposes and, by doing so, potentially 
encouraging innovation and economic growth.

4  This list of examples is adapted from Open Textbooks, OER & Other 
Open or Free Resources for Faculty. Licensed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Portions 
of the original text have been cut, edited and mixed with original 
content.

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

 
10

A special note of caution on the use of NC and/or 
ND licenses by publishers

When selecting a CC BY license with an NC or ND restriction for an article, authors commonly  
(but unknowingly) transfer the exclusive right to manage the license to their publisher. This is stated  
in the “License to Publish agreement”, but not all publishers communicate this clearly to authors  
(see publisher policy examples). When a license with an NC and/or ND restriction for the end user is 
chosen by the author, the right to manage the license includes the right to reuse the publication either 
commercially or in adapted form and grant third parties the right to do so. Publishers can authorize 
commercial reuse at their sole discretion and charge third parties for the permission to reuse, redistribute, 
adapt (e.g., translate), and/or make the work further known. In this way, the right to commercially reuse 
a publication or make adaptations becomes an extra revenue stream for publishers, as these rights are  
no longer in the hands of the author. 

NB: 
By using a CC BY license, crediting the original work and stating the license under which the work is  
licensed is mandatory for all types of reuse. 

What alternative do you have?

It is important to consider what you want to protect with a non-commercial or non-derivative license.  
If it is a model, an image, or data that you wish to protect, we recommend the following steps. 

STEP 1:   Determine the object you want to protect.
STEP 2:   Deposit the object in a trusted repository and apply a CC BY-NC or CC BY-ND or  

CC BY-NC-ND license, depending on your needs.

STEP 3:   Publish the article under a CC BY license and reference the object previously deposited in  

the repository in the article.

In this way, the right to commercially reuse the object and make derivatives remains with the author.  
Trustworthy data repositories such as Zenodo, 4TU ResearchData or DataVerseNL do not take over control  
of the license from the depositor. Authors retain the rights and permissions to reuse and redistribute their 
data, images, models or other objects. Once the object is safely deposited and appropriately licensed, 
authors can proceed to publish the article under a CC BY license. This will enable the text of the article to  
be widely reused, while the object will be protected from unauthorized commercial reuse and derivatives. 

Flipboard by thms.nl 
is licensed under CC BY 2.0 

 
 
11

4

Questions
about process

4.1

How do I publish under a  
Creative Commons licence?  

or: 
© year of publication, name of author(s), CC BY 4.0.  
To view a copy of this licence, visit  
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0

If you publish your work open access with a publisher, 
preprint server or repository,  usually  you need to 
choose a specific CC licence when signing the  
publishing contract. The publisher, preprint server or 
repository will add the selected licence to the final 
published work according to the mandatory format.

If you want to make your work public with a CC licence 
yourself, you can simply mark your work with the  
specific CC licence that you want to use. You can do this 
by stating the licence in a copyright notice, or by adding 
the logo of the licence, with a link to the licence infor-
mation on the Creative Commons website. Logos and 
links can be found on the Creative Commons website. 
The Licence Chooser by Creative Commons helps you 
generate a ready to use text or html code to copy onto 
your work. 

Note that all copyright holders e.g. co-authors of a work, 
or holders of similar rights, should agree on the used CC 
licence.

Some publishers demand that you add a specific CC 
licence to the Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM) of 
your work when self archiving it, e.g. in the institutional 
repository. The text example given above is sufficient 
to comply with this. You can find out what copyright 
and self-archiving policies different publishers have on 
SHERPA/ RoMEO

4.2

How do I attribute Creative 
Commons licensed work?  

For example:  
This work is licensed under CC BY 4.0. To view a copy of 
this licence, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0.

To give credit to the creator of CC-licensed work you 
can refer to this best practices guide. Alternatively  
you can use this Open Attribution Builder which auto-
matically generates the attribution for you based on the 
information you provide. 

or:  
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons  
Attribution 4.0 International License.

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

 
 
 
12

4. Questions about process

4.3

4.5

Who holds the copyright for
a publication published under
a Creative Commons licence?  

Can I change my mind about 
a Creative Commons licence 
after the work is published?     

Under a CC licence, the copyright remains with the 
licensor. The licensor can only be the current copyright 
holder or rights holder (usually the author unless the 
author has transferred copyright to the publisher,  
see also 2.2.). 

No, CC licences are irrevocable. Once a work is 
published under a CC licence, licensees may continue 
using the work according to the licence terms for as 
long as the material is protected by copyright, even if 
you later stop distributing it.

4.4

Who is responsible for 
enforcing the Creative  
Commons licence?    

The licensor is always the copyright holder, the author 
or e.g. a publisher. In the event that the publisher owns 
copyright, the publisher is responsible for enforcement. 
In the event that the author is the licensor and licences 
the work to the public, it will be the author. In short, 
it depends upon the contract or agreement between 
the author and the publisher – if there is one.5 Creative 
Commons strongly encourages amicable resolution 
when attribution disputes arise – this is seen as an 
important value within the Creative Commons  
community.6 

Photo by Amador Loureiro on Unsplash 

5  The author remains the copyright holder if no copyright transfer
  contract was concluded. The same is true if a licence contract was 

6  https://creativecommons.org/2020/01/15/thoughts-on-non-
  amicable-enforcement-of-cc-licenses/

concluded. However, in a licence contract the author can agree that 
the publisher will enforce the CC licence in their place.  

 
 
 
13

5

Questions about
Creative Commons and 
open access books 

Open access monographs are establishing themselves 
as a publication model in the humanities and social 
sciences and researchers are increasingly aware of this 
option. In addition, funders are beginning to introduce 
open access requirements for books in their policies. CC 
licences are also used in the domain of books. This sec-
tion answers some of the common questions regarding 
books and Creative Commons. 

5.2

Will my book still be made
available in print if it is 
published under a Creative 
Commons licence? 

5.1

Can my book still be sold if it 
is published under a Creative 
Commons licence? 

Yes. Often, a PDF will be made available for free, and the 
publisher will continue to charge for print and possibly 
other e-book versions. Others may publish and sell your 
book, too. However, if you licence your work under a CC 
NC licence which permits only non-commercial reuse, 
you will need to grant your publisher permission to sell 
the book commercially. 

This will depend upon your publisher and what you 
agree to in the publishing contract. Some publishers will 
rely upon selling print versions of the open access book 
to support their business model. Some are moving to a 
print-on-demand option for open access content, but 
this should not affect the availability of your print book. 

5.3

Will I still get royalties from a 
book with a Creative Commons 
licence?  

That will depend upon the agreement between you  
and your publisher, but in principle there is no reason 
why you should not receive royalties on any sales of a 
book published under a CC licence. If you think your 
book is likely to produce significant royalties, you should 
consider this in negotiations with your publisher. 

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

 
14

5. Questions about Creative Commons and open access books 

5.4

If I publish my book under a  
CC BY licence can the book 
be translated without my  
permission?  

Yes, the use of a CC BY licence permits derivative works 
to be made, including translations, without seeking the 
licensor’s permission. Note that derivatives have  
to give appropriate credit to the original work, provide a 
link to the licence, and indicate if changes were made. 
Granting a CC BY licence does not imply that the  
original creator endorses any derivatives. If you include 
the ND element to your licence, users will have to ask 
the licensor (be it the publisher or the author) for  
permission before making any derivatives.

Steal Like An Artist – “Do good work and share it with people”
by Austin Kleon is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0  

 
15

6

Questions about
repercussions for
scholarship

It is important to understand that a Creative Commons 
licence only covers a new piece of scholarship, as an 
author can only license their own work, not that of 
others. Third party content is therefore excluded from 
the scope of the Creative Commons licence. Even if an 
author includes in their work a piece of third party  
content, such as an image, that has been licensed  
under CC BY, the image is excluded from the Creative 
Commons licence that the author applies to their work. 
This is because the image has been licensed under a 
separate Creative Commons licence, granted by the 
image creator. Therefore all third party content,  
including content which the author has permission  
to use in a publication published with a Creative  
Commons licence, must be clearly marked in a similar 
way to a traditional publication, which would also 
recognise third party content.

Marking by the author ensures that users understand 
the different licence conditions which apply to the third 
party content. An example from the Creative Commons 
wiki illustrates this (see box).

Clearly marking the excluded elements and stating the 
terms under which third party content has been made 
available, means that anybody who reuses that content 
without permission from the original rights holder may 
be violating the third party’s copyright, even if they 
found the content in an open access publication.

Marking third party content 7 

Here’s how you may want to consider marking 
third party content that is offered under a  
different CC licence than the one you are using. 
Examples of marking your own work:
•  Except otherwise noted, this blog is © 2009 

Greg Grossmeier, under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-ShareAlike licence: http:// 
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/.

Example of marking the differently licensed 
item:
•  The photo X is © 2009 Jane Park, used under 
a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncom-
mercial licence: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/3.0/.

In general, when using works offered under CC 
licences you should consider adhering to best 
practices for marking that content.  

7  https://wiki.creativecommons.org/wiki/Best_practices_for_
  attribution.  

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

16

6. Questions about repercussions for scholarship

6.2

6.4

Should I apply a Creative 
Commons license to  
research data?

In the case of open data, the application of CC licenses 
to research data is useful to indicate which reuse is 
permitted. For data that requires restricted access some 
repositories have a specific license available. Applying a 
CC license is, however, not as straightforward as in the 
case of scholarly publications, as factual data is not  
protected by copyright. Although copyright may in 
some cases be applicable, there are more issues to  
consider before depositing research data:
•  Rights of (human) participants in a study;
• 
• 

 Confidentiality of data;
Intellectual property on assets in the dataset  
(e.g., patents, software code);

•  Copyright protection of (parts of) the contents in  

the dataset;

•  Contractual obligations set out in agreements with 

partner organisations;

•  Legislation concerning databases and ownership  

of rights and/or contents.

OpenAIRE offers guidance on the protection of research 
data. Repositories for research software and/or code 
may offer their own discipline-specific set of licenses. 
Please note that not all research data repositories offer 
the possibility to apply a CC license to a dataset.

6.3 

Will Creative Commons 
licences encourage plagiarism? 

Plagiarism may affect all forms of publishing rather than 
specifically CC-licensed works. All CC licences require 
that the original author is attributed, meaning that any 
plagiaristic use is unacceptable; failure to attribute  
constitutes copyright infringement. It is important to 
stress that plagiarism is primarily an issue of academic 
ethics rather than the law. It has some crossover with 
copyright, but content can be plagiarised regardless of 
how it is licensed, even after it is out of copyright.  
Plagiarism is considered an instance of serious  
academic misconduct by ‘The Netherlands Code of 
Conduct for Scientific Integrity’ and is sanctioned  
accordingly.  

What can I do if somebody 
is using my work without  
complying with the conditions 
of the applied Creative  
Commons licence? 

For example, if a reuser of CC-licensed material does 
not provide the attribution required when sharing the 
work, then the user no longer has the right to continue 
using the material and may be liable for copyright 
infringement. The licence is terminated for the user who 
violated the licence. However, all other users still need 
to comply with the terms of use of the CC-licensed 
material in question. In case of violation of a CC licence, 
the licensor can contact the reuser directly to ask to 
rectify the situation or begin legal proceedings for  
copyright infringement.  

6.5

Are there special circumstances 
in some disciplines leading to 
specific licence demands?

Although CC licences have been used extensively 
in scientific open access publishing, they have been 
developed to cover a much broader area including data, 
databases, arts, music, photography and the written 
word, regardless of discipline. CC licences can therefore 
be of use in all disciplines. 

It is true though that there is more sensitivity towards 
more liberal forms of reuse in the humanities.  
The possibility to translate scholarly works without the 
copyright holder’s permission, which is possible under 
some CC licences, tends not to be viewed favorably by 
humanities scholars. The ability to control the quality 
of the translation is deemed important because of the 
linguistic nature of much humanities research. The CC 
BY-ND licence can accommodate these concerns, while 
still allowing the work to be distributed and reused 
widely.

Regardless of any licence, authors can always have  
to deal with the issue of wilful misrepresentation.  
These can also happen with citations. That cannot be 
prevented by choosing a specific licence.

 
 
 
 
17

7

Questions about
derivatives and reuse

7.1

7.2

Does a CC BY licence mean 
that anyone can reuse my work 
however they want to? 

How can I avoid the  
misrepresentation of my  
work in derivatives?

A CC BY licence allows users to share (copy and 
redistribute the material in any medium or format) and 
adapt (remix, transform, and build upon the material) 
for any purposes, also commercially. However, users 
must attribute you (unless you have specifically said that 
you do not want to be attributed) and clearly indicate if 
changes have been made to your original work. Additio-
nally, users must not imply that you endorse or support 
the changes that they have made or the new work that 
they have produced.  

As with plagiarism (§6.3), misuse of academic research 
is a longstanding and recognised problem. Nothing in a 
CC licence makes it acceptable for a user to misrepresent 
or misuse an author’s work (see also §6.5). If your work 
is adapted or used in a way that you do not agree with, 
for example, because it is incorrect, or because you do 
not support the stance of the users, you have the option 
to request removal of attribution.8  

CC licences also contain a ‘no endorsement, no  
sponsorship’ clause, which explicitly says that users may 
not imply that the original author supports or endorses 
their reuse of the work. If they violate this clause, they 
are in breach of the CC licence and must stop using the 
work. In such cases of violation, the violator becomes 
liable to action under copyright law.  

Photo by Green Chameleon on Unsplash 

8  https://creativecommons.org/faq/#what-can-i-do-if-i-offer-my-
  material-under-a-creative-commons-license-and-i-do-not-like- 

the-way-someone-uses-it 

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

18

7. Questions about derivatives and reuse

7.3

Can I specifically ask not to be
attributed for a certain piece of 
work? 

Yes, you can. If you do not want to be associated with 
a certain piece of work, you can ask for your attribution 
to be removed and the user must comply if reasonably 
practical. 

7.4

Creative Commons licences 
and text and data mining and 
why is it relevant to me? 

Text and data mining (TDM) are algorithmic techniques 
for processing bodies of texts or other types of data in 
ways, and at scales, that would not be viable manually. 
A researcher may wish to examine the ways in which a 
specific issue has been represented in the past fifty years 
in a corpus of academic works (e.g. academic journal 
articles) through text and data mining. With works that 
are still in copyright, this may not be possible. Under 
the CC BY licence, however, this type of work can be 
undertaken.

Examples of reuse not  
compatible with a ND licence 

•  Modify images – change the colors, edit 
someone in or out, crop the image. 

•  Edit (parts of) a text and reproduce them in a 

new publication.

•  Customize content to a specific location/
discipline/focus – change examples, add 
different scenarios, change terms to reflect a 
different discipline.

•  Translate a work into another language.
•  Reuse for open educational resources (9.1) 

Photo by Patrick Tomasso on Unsplash 

 
19

8

Questions about
commercial use

8.1

Why is the use of a non- 
commercial Creative 
Commons licence  
discouraged? 

That is because the definition of ‘non-commercial’  
in Creative Commons is open to interpretation. It is  
difficult to know what exactly constitutes commercial 
reuse. For example, if someone posted a copy of a 
paper on an educational website that generates even a 
small amount of revenue from advertising, it could be 
considered as commercial reuse. As such, the use of NC 
licences could have unwanted consequences on the 
possibilities of distribution of your content. 

There is considerable debate about whether ‘non- 
commercial’ coincides with ‘not-for-profit’. A study 
commissioned by Creative Commons into the inter- 
pretation of ‘commercial’ and ‘non-commercial’ by 
creators and users indicated that uses for charitable 
purposes are considered ‘less commercial’ but not 
‘decidedly non-commercial’.10 Therefore, applying a NC 
licence to your work could prohibit all types of organi-
sations that generate revenue from redistributing your 
work. Permitting all commercial reuse removes this 
problem, and allows people to reuse the work without 

worrying about whether they may (unintentionally) 
make money from it. 

Apart from the mentioned interpretation issue – and for 
some more importantly – is the principle that ‘research 
that is publicly financed should be available for reuse for 
all purposes’ because it may help generate products and 
services that benefit society and because organisations 
involved in commercial endeavours also pay taxes that 
the research is funded by.

8.2

Why should I allow another 
party to make money out of 
my publications, which is my 
intellectual property? 

The term ‘commercial use’ refers to the fact that an 
organisation intends to obtain a commercial advantage 
and possibly aims for financial remuneration. It is  
tempting to immediately think about large multina-
tionals like Shell, Google, Amazon, but actually a non 
commercial licence prevents all revenue-generating 
organisations from reusing your work. This can even 
include cultural or educational institutions like schools, 
museums or universities. Even those nowadays cannot 
rely exclusively on public funding and have to rely in 

10  Further information on the study and the work of Creative

Commons on the definition of non-commercial for version 4.0 
of the licences is available at: http://wiki.creativecommons.org/ 
Defining_Noncommercial.

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

 
20

8. Questions about commercial use

part on their own revenues. As such, the use of a NC 
licence precludes a large pool of organizations and  
institutions from reusing your work, thus possibly  
reducing its impact and visibility.  

No matter who the commercial party reusing the  
material is, the intended reuse may not necessarily  
be a bad thing. Think about pharmaceutical companies 
using text and data mining techniques to develop new  
drugs or vaccines; or bringing together papers from 
prestigious journals and selling them as printed text-
books in less-developed countries with limited internet 
access. 

One of the reasons why open access is supported in  
the Netherlands and globally, is its potential to foster  
and accelerate innovation and economic development.  
Funders like NWO and ZonMw want to maximize the 
social and economic impact of their publicly funded 
research and are held accountable to that. The use  
of restrictive NC licences could seriously hamper  
economic and social growth. For this reason, NWO, 
ZonMw and all COAlition S funders will not accept 
licences that include the NC condition. 

Examples of reuse not  
compatible with a NC licence 

•  Distribute a work in the context of a  
commercial summer school course.

•  Copy a text for indexing or text mining for 

commercial purposes.

•  Reproduce a work in magazines, newspapers 

or websites that produce revenues. 

•  Reuse parts of a work (e.g. tables or figures) 
for advertising or marketing purposes. 

Photo by DESIGNECOLOGIST on Unsplash 

21

9

Open educational
resources and Creative 
Commons licences 

Belonging to the umbrella of Open Science, Open 
Educational Resources (OER) are “learning, teaching 
and research materials in any format and medium that 
reside in the public domain or are under copyright that 
have been released under an open licence, that permit 
no-cost access, reuse, re-purpose, adaptation and  
redistribution by others” (2019 UNESCO Recommen-
dation on OER). OER include textbooks, syllabi, articles, 
lecture notes, videos, images, simulations, exercises, 
whole courses and many other types of educational 
contents. 

CC licences are essential to understanding and using 
the abovementioned five permissions of OER, or the 
‘5R activities’,11 namely the right to retain, revise, remix, 
reuse and redistribute specific materials. These rights 
are granted to the user by the copyright holder through 
licensing the original content with a combination of  
different CC licences – BY, SA, NC – or through  
dedicating the material to the public domain (CC0). 
Thus, CC-licensing conditions provide a clear indication 
of what is and is not allowed when creating, reusing or 
revising OER content.

9.1

How do OER differ from  
open access publications?

Both OER and open access (OA) publications – scholarly 
books and journal articles – are openly licensed mate-
rials that imply free unrestricted access. Unlike OA 
publications that may encompass the whole range of 
CC licences, OER are always available under a licence 
that allows adaptations (CC BY, SA, NC or their com-
binations). Thus, CC ND-licensed materials fall out of 
the scope of OER. Generally speaking, OER are usually 
associated with teaching, while OA publications belong 
to research practices. However, OA publications can be 
used for teaching purposes and may also qualify as OER, 
if released under an appropriate CC licence.12  

11  The concept is derived from Defining the “Open” in Open 
Content and Open Educational Resources by David Wiley,  
licensed under CC BY 4.0.

12  This paragraph is adapted from Open Access & Education, 
Expanded by Abbey Elder, licensed under CC BY 4.0.

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

 
22

9. Open educational resources and Creative Commons licences 

9.2

9.3

How do Creative Commons 
licences allow me to incor- 
porate OER in my teaching?

Using CC licences is an easy way to keep your  
copyright and at the same time enable legal sharing  
of educational resources with teachers and learners 
worldwide. Due to the permissive nature of CC licences 
used for the creation and publication of OER, such 
materials can be integrated into most courses and 
enable educators to use or develop innovative and  
learner-centered resources.

CC licences allow a teacher to be both a user and a 
creator of OER at the same time. Teachers can (re)use 
CC-licensed presentations, books, simulations, mind 
maps and images and embed them into their courses as 
part of the core or auxiliary materials. Teachers can also 
become co-creators of OER by revising and remixing 
contents and adapting them to specific educational 
needs: translating them, enriching them with locally 
relevant examples or updating them according to recent 
developments in the field. For instance, openly licensed 
works can be used to create open textbooks, which help 
reduce the daunting cost of textbooks and therefore 
make educational material more accessible. 

How will Creative Commons 
content affect my teaching?

One of the biggest hurdles to those wishing to use OER 
is the content from third parties and the lack of agreed 
pricing structure from publishers of such content to use 
the material for open access purposes.

By licensing your work under CC licences, you ensure 
that you and others can teach using your scholarly  
outputs. As previously indicated, certain forms of  
existing copyright transfer can interfere with this  
practice.

Licensing academic content under CC licences implies 
awareness that the web facilitates sharing and reuse. 
Books and other materials made available online and 
licensed with CC licences pose fewer restrictions for 
their distribution and access, therefore potentially 
increasing the likelihood of an impact outside higher 
education.

Photo by Umberto on Unsplash

23

Glossary 

Attribution (BY): the original author lets others 
use their work if they give credit the way the author 
requests.

Original author: in the case of a literary or artistic 
work, the individual, individuals, entity or entities who 
created the work. 

Work: the literary and/or artistic work offered under the 
terms of the licence including without limitation any 
production in the literary, scientific, and artistic domain, 
whatever may be the mode or form of its expression 
including digital form, such as a book, pamphlet, and 
other writing.

Remix: mixing material from different sources or 
multiple works to create a wholly new creation or work. 
One often cannot tell where one open work ends and 
another one begins. All remixes are derivative works, but 
not all derivative works are remixes, e.g. a translation.

Reproduce: to make copies of the work by any means, 
e.g. digitally, including without limitation by sound or 
visual recordings, by fixation and reproducing fixations 
of the work and  storage of a protected performance or 
phonogram in digital form or other medium.

Share Alike (SA): the rights holder allows others to 
make derivatives from the author’s original work, but 
they should distribute these derivative works only under 
a licence which is similar or recognized compatible to 
the licence that governs the original work.

Share: copy and redistribute the material in any 
medium or format. 

Third-party content: material created by others.

Collection: the work in its entirety in unmodified form 
along with one or more other separate and independent 
works, assembled into a collective whole.

Derivative (works): material in any form that is 
created by editing, modifying or adapting the work, 
a substantial part of the work, or the work and other 
pre-existing works. Derivative (works) may, for example, 
include a translation, adaptation, musical arrangement, 
dramatisation, motion picture version, sound recor-
ding, art reproduction, abridgment, condensation, or 
any other form in which the work may be transformed, 
recast, remixed, tweaked or adapted.

Distribute: to make the original and copies of the work 
or derivative available to the public by means, including 
publication, electronic communication,  
storage in digital form or broadcast.  

Licensor: the individual, individuals, entity or entities 
that own(s) copyright in the work and are authorised to 
offer the work under the terms of a CC licence.

Licensee: the parties gaining access to the work 
offered under the terms of a CC licence (publisher,  
the public).  

Non-Commercial (NC): the rights holder lets others 
use the work but for non-commercial purposes only.  
It does not mean that works may  never be used for 
commercial purposes, but this requires a separate  
permission from the rights holder.

No Derivatives (ND): the rights holder authorizes 
others to copy, distribute, display, and perform only  
verbatim copies of the work, but does not grant the  
permission to make derivative works based upon it.  
The right to make adaptations is subject to separate 
permission. 

Guide to Creative Commons for Scholarly Publications and Educational Resources

BACK TO CONTENTS

24

Attribution and
acknowledgements 

This work is a derivative of Ellen Collins, Caren Milloy 
and Graham Stone, Guide to Creative Commons for 
Humanities and Social Science Monograph Authors, 
ed. James Baker, Martin Paul Eve and Ernesto Priego 
(London: Jisc Collections, 2013). Available at:  
https://web.archive.org/web/20180513090102/http:/
oapen-uk.jiscebooks.org/files/2011/01/CC-Guide-for-
HSS-Monograph-Authors-CC-BY.pdf. Licensed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License. 
The original text has been cut, edited and mixed with 
original content.

In addition, this work reused material from the  
following CC-licensed sources:
•  About CC Licences. Licensed under a Creative  
Commons Attribution 4.0 International licence. 
https://creativecommons.org/about/cclicenses/
•  Martin Paul Eve, Open Access and the Humanities: 

Contexts, Controversies and the Future (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2014). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316161012. 
Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
license.

•  Open Textbooks, OER & Other Open or Free 
Resources for Faculty. Licensed under a  
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 
International License. https://guides.kirkwood.edu/c.
php?g=435826&p=3926923

•  Paul Klimpel, Free Knowledge based on Creative  
Commons Licenses Consequences, risks and 
side-effects of the license module „non-commercial 
use only – NC (Berlijn 2012) https://vlaamse-erf-
goedbibliotheken.be/en/node/2725 

Whenever sources other than the OAPEN-UK guide  
are reused, this is clearly indicated in the footnotes 
throughout the document and the sources are  
properly attributed. 

This guide has been written by: 
•  Pascal Braak (University of Amsterdam)

  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0491-3558 

•  Hans de Jonge (NWO)

  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1189-9133 

•  Giulia Trentacosti (University of Groningen)
  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4871-477X

• 

Irene Verhagen (Wageningen University & Research)   

  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5588-1333

•  Saskia Woutersen (Leiden University)

  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0120-266X 

The authors would like to thank Myroslava Zhuk  
(University of Groningen) for contributing the section 
about Open Educational Resources. The authors would 
also like to extend their gratitude to Annemarie Beunen 
(National Library of the Netherlands), Jeroen Bosman 
(Utrecht University), Martin Paul Eve (Birkbeck College, 
University of London) for reviewing this guide. 

October 2020

DOI
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4090923

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons  
Attribution 4.0 International License.

 
 
 
 
 
