Customer Identification Program 

CUSTOMER IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM 

Objective:  Assess the bank’s compliance with the BSA regulatory requirements for the 
Customer Identification Program (CIP). 

Regulatory Requirements for Customer Identification Programs   

This section outlines the regulatory requirements for banks in 12 CFR Chapters I through III and 
VII, and 31 CFR Chapter X regarding CIPs.  Specifically, this section covers: 

•  12 CFR 21.21(c)(2) 

•  12 CFR 208.63(b)(2), 12 CFR 211.5(m)(2), 12 CFR 211.24(j)(2) 

•  12 CFR 326.8(b)(2) 

•  12 CFR 748.2(b)(2) 

•  31 CFR 1020.220 

A bank, including certain domestic subsidiaries,1 must have a written CIP2 that is appropriate for 
its size and type of business and that includes certain minimum requirements.  The CIP must be 
incorporated into the bank’s BSA/AML compliance program,3 which is subject to approval by 
the bank’s board of directors.4  Minor weaknesses, deficiencies, and technical violations alone 
are not indicative of an inadequate CIP. 

Identity Verification Procedures 

The CIP must include risk-based procedures for verifying the identity of each customer to the 
extent reasonable and practicable.5  The procedures must enable the bank to form a reasonable 
belief that it knows the true identity of each customer and be based on the bank’s assessment of 
relevant risks, including: 

•  The types of accounts maintained by the bank. 

•  The bank’s methods of opening accounts. 

1 See OCC 12 CFR 5.34(e)(3) and 5.38(e)(3) (examination and supervision of operating subsidiaries of national 
banks and federal savings associations).  See also FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury 
(April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under 
Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” Definition of “bank” FAQ #3.  The FDIC will evaluate each subsidiary 
relationship in the context of the bank’s safety and soundness before determining whether the CIP applies to the 
bank’s subsidiaries.  Wholly- or majority-owned credit union service organizations (CUSOs) may be considered 
subsidiaries of the credit union owner; however, as separate legal entities, the NCUA has no direct regulatory 
authority over CUSOs. 
2 12 CFR 208.63(b)(2), 211.5(m)(2), and 211.24(j)(2) (Federal Reserve); 12 CFR 326.8(b)(2) (FDIC); 12 CFR 
748.2(b)(2) (NCUA); 12 CFR 21.21(c)(2) (OCC); and 31 CFR 1020.220 (FinCEN). 
3 12 CFR 208.63(b)(2), 211.5(m)(2), and 211.24(j)(2) (Federal Reserve); 12 CFR 326.8(b)(2) (FDIC); 12 CFR 
748.2(b)(2) (NCUA); 12 CFR 21.21(c)(2) (OCC); and 31 CFR 1020.220 (FinCEN). 
4 12 CFR 208.63(b), 211.5(m), and 211.24(j) (Federal Reserve); 12 CFR 326.8(b) (2) (FDIC); 12 CFR 748.2(b) 
(NCUA); 12 CFR 21.21 (OCC). 
5 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2). 

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

1 

February 2021 

                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

•  The types of identifying information available. 
•  The bank’s size, location, and customer base.6 

For purposes of the CIP rule, an “account” is a formal banking relationship established to 
provide or engage in services, dealings, or other financial transactions, including a deposit 
account, a transaction or asset account, a credit account, or other extension of credit.  An account 
includes a relationship established to provide a safety deposit box or other safekeeping services, 
or cash management, custodian, and trust services.7 

An account does not include:8 

•  A product or service where a formal banking relationship is not established with a person, 

such as check-cashing, wire transfer, or sale of a check or money order; 

•  An account that the bank acquires through an acquisition, merger, purchase of assets, or 

assumption of liabilities; or 

•  An account opened for the purpose of participating in an employee benefit plan 
established under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.  

The CIP rule applies to a customer,9 which means: 

•  A person that opens a new account; and  

•  An individual who opens a new account for: 

o  An individual who lacks legal capacity, such as a minor; or  
o  An entity that is not a legal person, such as a civic club.   

A customer does not include a person who does not receive banking services, such as a person 
whose loan application is denied10 or a person that has an existing account with the bank, 
provided that the bank has a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the person.11  
Also excluded from the definition of customer are financial institutions regulated by a federal 
functional regulator or a bank regulated by a state bank regulator, governmental entities, and 
publicly traded companies as described in 31 CFR 1020.315(b)(2) through (b)(4).12 

6 Id. 
7 31 CFR 1020.100(a)(1). 
8 31 CFR 1020.100(a)(2).  
9 31 CFR 1020.100(b). 
10 FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive 
Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” 
Definition of “account” FAQ #1.   
11 31 CFR 1020.100(b)(2)(iii).  FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), 
“Interagency Interpretive Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the 
USA PATRIOT Act,” Person with an existing account FAQ #3.  A bank can demonstrate that it has “a reasonable 
belief” by showing that prior to the issuance of the final CIP rule, it had comparable procedures in place to verify the 
identity of persons that had accounts with the bank as of October 1, 2003, though the bank may not have gathered 
the very same information about such persons as required by the final CIP rule.     
12 31 CFR 1020.100(b)(2). 

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

2 

February 2021 

 
                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

Customer Information Required 

The CIP must contain account-opening procedures detailing the identifying information to obtain 
from each customer.13  At a minimum, the bank must obtain the following identifying 
information from each customer before opening the account: 

•  Name, 

•  Date of birth for an individual, 
•  Address,14 and  

• 

Identification number.15 

The CIP rule provides for an exception for opening an account for a customer who has applied 
for a tax identification number (TIN) and an alternative process for obtaining CIP identifying 
information for credit card accounts. 

•  The exception permits the bank to open an account for a customer who has applied for a 
TIN, but does not yet have a TIN.  In this case, the bank’s CIP must include procedures 
to confirm that the application was filed before the customer opens the account and to 
obtain the TIN within a reasonable period of time after the account is opened.16   

•  For a credit card account, the bank may also obtain CIP identifying information about the 

customer by acquiring it from a third-party source prior to extending credit to the 
customer.17   

13 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(i).  Given the definition of customer, when an individual opens a new account for an 
entity that is not a legal person or for another individual who lacks legal capacity, the identifying information for the 
individual opening the account must be obtained.  In contrast, when an account is opened by an agent on behalf of 
another person, the bank must obtain the identifying information of the person on whose behalf the account is being 
opened, as this person is defined as the customer. 
14 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(i)(A)(3).  For an individual:  a residential or business street address, or if the individual 
does not have such an address, an Army Post Office (APO) or Fleet Post Office (FPO) box number, or the 
residential or business street address of next of kin or of another contact individual.  For a “person” other than an 
individual (such as a corporation, partnership, or trust):  a principal place of business, local office, or other physical 
location.  FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive 
Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” 
Information required FAQ #1, further explains that for an individual, the description of the customer’s physical 
location will suffice.  
15 An identification number for a U.S. person is a taxpayer identification number (TIN) (or evidence of an 
application for one consistent with 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(i)(B)).  An identification number for a non-U.S. person is 
one or more of the following:  a TIN (or evidence of an application for one consistent with 31 CFR 
1020.220(a)(2)(i)(B)); a passport number and country of issuance; an alien identification card number; or a number 
and country of issuance of any other government-issued document evidencing nationality or residence and bearing a 
photograph or similar safeguard.  When opening an account for a foreign business or enterprise that does not have 
an identification number, the bank must request alternative government-issued documentation certifying the 
existence of the business or enterprise.  TINs are described in section 6109 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 USC 
6109) and the IRS regulations implementing that section (26 CFR Part 301.6109-1) (e.g., Social Security number 
(SSN), individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN), or employer identification number (EIN)).  
16 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(i)(B).   
17 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(i)(C).    

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

3 

February 2021 

                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

Based on its BSA/AML risk assessment, a bank may require identifying information, in addition 
to the required information, for certain customers or product lines.18 

Customer Verification 

The CIP must contain risk-based19 procedures for verifying the identity of the customer within a 
reasonable period of time after the account is opened.20  The verification procedures must use the 
“information obtained in accordance with [31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(i)],” namely the identifying 
information obtained by the bank.21  A bank need not establish the accuracy of every element of 
identifying information obtained, but it must verify enough information to form a reasonable 
belief that it knows the true identity of the customer.22  The bank’s procedures must describe 
when it uses documents, non-documentary methods, or a combination of both methods to verify 
the identity of its customers.23 

Verification Through Documents 

A bank relying on documents to verify a customer’s identity must have procedures that set forth 
the documents that the bank will use.24  The CIP rule gives examples of the types of documents 
that may be used to verify a customer’s identity.  The rule reflects the federal banking agencies’ 
expectations that, for most customers who are individuals, banks review an unexpired 
government-issued form of identification evidencing a customer’s nationality or residence and 
bearing a photograph or similar safeguard; examples include a driver’s license or passport.  
However, other forms of identification may be used if they enable the bank to form a reasonable 
belief that it knows the true identity of the customer.  Given the availability of counterfeit and 
fraudulently obtained documents, a bank is encouraged to review more than a single document to 
ensure it can form a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the customer. 

For a person other than an individual (such as a corporation, partnership, or trust), documents 
may include those showing the legal existence of the entity, such as certified articles of 
incorporation, an unexpired government-issued business license, a partnership agreement, or a 
trust instrument.25 

Verification Through Non-Documentary Methods 

A bank using non-documentary methods to verify a customer’s identity must have procedures 
that set forth the methods the bank uses.26  Non-documentary methods may include contacting a 
customer; independently verifying the customer’s identity through the comparison of information 

18 FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive 
Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” 
Definition of “customer” FAQs #7, 9, 10. 
19 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2).   
20 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii). 
21 Id. 
22 FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive 
Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” 
Customer verification FAQ #1. 
23 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii). 
24 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii)(A). 
25 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii)(A)(2). 
26 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii)(B). 

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

4 

February 2021 

                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

provided by the customer with information obtained from a consumer reporting agency, public 
database, or other source; checking references with other financial institutions; and obtaining a 
financial statement.27 

If the bank uses non-documentary methods to verify a customer’s identity, the bank’s procedures 
must address situations in which an individual is unable to present an unexpired government-
issued identification document that bears a photograph or similar safeguard; the bank is not 
familiar with the documents presented; the account is opened without obtaining documents; the 
customer opens the account without appearing in person at the bank; and where the bank is 
otherwise presented with circumstances that increase the risk that the bank will be unable to 
verify the true identity of a customer through documents.28 

Additional Verification for Certain Customers 

The CIP must address situations in which, based on its risk assessment of a new account opened 
by a customer that is not an individual, the bank will obtain information about individuals with 
authority or control over such account, including signatories, in order to verify the customer’s 
identity.  This verification method applies only when the bank cannot verify the customer’s true 
identity using documents or non-documentary methods.29   

Lack of Verification 

The CIP must also have procedures30 for responding to circumstances in which the bank cannot 
form a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the customer.  These procedures should 
describe: 

•  When the bank should not open an account; 

•  The terms under which a customer may use an account while the bank attempts to verify 

the customer’s identity; 

•  When the bank should close an account, after attempts to verify a customer’s identity 

have failed; and 

•  When the bank should file a suspicious activity report (SAR) in accordance with 

applicable law and regulation. 

Recordkeeping and Retention Requirements  

The bank’s CIP must include procedures for making and maintaining a record of all information 
obtained to identify and verify a customer’s identity.31  At a minimum, the bank must retain all 
identifying information (name, date of birth for an individual, address, identification number, and 

27 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii)(B)(1). 
28 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii)(B)(2). 
29 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(ii)(C). 
30 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(iii). 
31 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(3). 

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

5 

February 2021 

                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

any other identifying information obtained under 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(i)32) at account 
opening for CIP purposes for a period of five years after the account is closed.  For credit cards, 
the retention period is five years after the account is closed or becomes dormant.33   

A bank may keep copies of identifying documents that it uses to verify a customer’s identity; 
however, the CIP rule does not require it.  A bank’s verification procedures must be risk-based 
and, in certain situations, keeping copies of identifying documents may be warranted.  In 
addition, a bank may have procedures to keep copies of the documents for other purposes, for 
example, to facilitate investigating potential fraud.  If the bank retains copies of identifying 
documents in lieu of a description, these documents must be retained in accordance with the 
general recordkeeping requirements in 31 CFR 1010.430, “Nature of Records and Retention 
Period.”  Nonetheless, a bank should not improperly use any document containing a picture of an 
individual, such as a driver’s license, in connection with any aspect of a credit transaction.34 

The bank must also keep a description of the following for five years after the record is made:35 

•  Any document that was relied on to verify identity, noting the type of document, any 

identification number contained in the document, the place of issuance, and, if any, the 
date of issuance and expiration date; 

•  The methods and the results of any measures undertaken to verify the identity of the 
customer using non-documentary methods or additional verification procedures for 
certain customers; and 

•  The resolution of any substantive discrepancy discovered when verifying the identifying 

information obtained. 

Comparison with Government Lists 

The CIP must include procedures for determining whether the customer appears on any list of 
known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations issued by any federal government agency 
and designated as such by Treasury in consultation with the federal functional regulators.36  The 
procedures must require the bank to make such a determination within a reasonable period of 
time after the account is opened, or earlier, if required by another federal law or regulation or 
federal directive issued in connection with the applicable list.  The procedures must also require 
the bank to follow all federal directives issued in connection with such lists.37  Banks will 

32 FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive 
Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” 
Retention of records FAQ #2.   
33 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(3).   
34 FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive 
Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” 
Required records FAQ #2. 
35 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(3)(i)(B)-(D). 
36 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(4). 
37 Id.   

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

6 

February 2021 

                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

receive notification by way of separate guidance regarding the list that must be consulted for 
purposes of this provision.38 

As of the publication date of this Manual, no designated government lists for CIP purposes exist.  
Checking of customers against Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) lists and 31 CFR 
1010.520 (commonly referred to as section 314(a) requests) remain separate and distinct 
requirements.   

Adequate Customer Notice 

The CIP must include procedures for providing bank customers with adequate notice that the 
bank is requesting information to verify their identities.39  Notice is adequate if the bank 
generally describes the identification requirements of the CIP rule and provides the notice in a 
manner reasonably designed to ensure that a customer is able to view or otherwise receive the 
notice before the account is opened.40  Depending on the manner in which an account is opened, 
examples of adequate notice may include posting a notice in the lobby or on the bank’s website, 
including a notice with account application documents, or providing other written or oral notice.  
The sample language below is provided in the regulation:41 

Important Information About Procedures for Opening a New Account 

To help the government fight the funding of terrorism and money laundering 
activities, Federal law requires all financial institutions to obtain, verify, and 
record information that identifies each person who opens an account. 

What this means for you: When you open an account, we will ask for your name, 
address, date of birth, and other information that will allow us to identify you.  
We may also ask to see your driver’s license or other identifying documents. 

Reliance on Another Financial Institution 

The bank’s CIP may include procedures specifying when a bank will rely on the performance by 
another financial institution (including an affiliate) of any procedures of the bank’s CIP with 
respect to any customer of the bank that is opening, or has opened, an account or has established 
a similar formal banking or business relationship with the other financial institution to provide or 
engage in services, dealings, or other financial transactions, provided that: 

•  Such reliance is reasonable under the circumstances; 

•  The other, relied-upon financial institution is subject to a rule implementing 31 USC 

5318(h) and is regulated by a federal functional regulator;42 and 

38 OCC, Federal Reserve, FDIC, OTS, NCUA, FinCEN (May 9, 2003), “Customer Identification Programs for 
Banks, Savings Associations, Credit Unions and Certain Non-Federally Regulated Banks,” 68 Fed. Reg. 25090, 
25103. 
39 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(5)(i). 
40 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(5)(ii). 
41 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(5)(iii). 
42 31 CFR 1010.100(r). Federal functional regulator means: Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, U.S. Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC), or U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). 

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

7 

February 2021 

                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

•  The other financial institution enters into a contract requiring it to certify annually to the 
bank that it has implemented its AML program, and that it will perform (or its agent will 
perform) the specified requirements of the bank’s CIP.43 

Exemptions 

The appropriate federal functional regulator, with the concurrence of FinCEN on behalf of the 
Secretary of the Treasury, may, by order or regulation, exempt any bank or type of account from 
the requirements of this section.44  The federal banking agencies, with FinCEN’s concurrence, 
have granted a CIP exemption for loans extended by banks and their subsidiaries to all customers 
to facilitate purchases of property and casualty insurance policies (referred to as premium 
finance loans).45  The federal banking agencies found that the exemption is consistent with the 
purposes of the BSA, based on FinCEN’s determination that premium finance loans present a 
low risk of money laundering or terrorist financing (ML/TF), and that this exemption is 
consistent with safe and sound banking. 

Other Legal Requirements 

Nothing in the CIP rule relieves a bank of its obligation to comply with any other provision of 
the BSA, including provisions concerning information that must be obtained, verified, or 
maintained in connection with any account or transaction.46 

Use of Third Parties 

The CIP rule does not alter a bank’s authority to use a third party, such as an agent or service 
provider, to perform services on its behalf.  Therefore, a bank may arrange for a third party, such 
as a car dealer or mortgage broker, acting as its agent in connection with a loan, to verify the 
identity of its customer.47  The bank can also arrange for a third party to maintain its records.  
However, as with other responsibilities performed by a third party, the bank is ultimately 
responsible for compliance with the requirements of the CIP rule.  Examiners should refer to 
their agency’s relevant guidance and requirements for such third-party relationships.48   

43 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(6). 
44 31 CFR 1020.220(b). 
45 Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, FinCEN (October 5, 2020), “Order granting an exemption from customer 
identification program requirements implementing section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act, 31 U.S.C. 5318(l), for 
loans extended by banks (and their subsidiaries) subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Banking Agencies to all 
customers to facilitate purchases of property and casualty insurance policies.” 
46 31 CFR 1020.220(c). 
47 Such third-party arrangements are contemplated in FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, 
Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements 
under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act,” Customer notice FAQ #2. 
48 Federal Reserve (December 5, 2013), SR 13-19 “Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk.”  FDIC (June 6, 
2008), FIL-44-2008 “Guidance for Managing Third-Party Risk.”  NCUA (December 2007), “Evaluating Third Party 
Relationships.”  OCC (October 30, 2013), Bulletin 2013-29 “Third Party Relationships: Risk Management 
Guidance;” and OCC (March 5, 2020), Bulletin 2020-10 “Third-Party Relationships: Frequently Asked Questions to 
Supplement OCC Bulletin 2013-29.”  

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

8 

February 2021 

 
                                                 
Customer Identification Program 

Additional Resources 

The U.S. Department of the Treasury, FinCEN, and the federal banking agencies have issued 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs), which may be revised periodically.49  FinCEN and the 
federal banking agencies have issued interagency guidance to issuing banks on applying CIP 
requirements to holders of prepaid cards.50  There is also guidance encouraging banks to use 
non-documentary verification methods permitted by the CIP requirements for customers who 
cannot provide standard identification documents because of the effects of natural disasters.51  
The FAQs, guidance, exceptive relief, and other related documents (e.g., the CIP rule) are 
available on the websites of FinCEN and the federal banking agencies. 

Examiner Assessment of the CIP Process 

Examiners should assess the adequacy of the bank’s policies, procedures, and processes (internal 
controls) related to the bank’s CIP.  Specifically, examiners should determine whether these 
internal controls are designed to mitigate and manage ML/TF and other illicit financial activity 
risks and comply with CIP requirements.  Examiners may review other information, such as 
recent independent testing or audit reports, to aid in their assessment of the bank’s CIP.   

Examiners should also consider general internal controls concepts, such as dual controls, 
segregation of duties, and management approval for certain actions, as they relate to the bank’s 
CIP.  Other internal controls may include BSA compliance officer or other senior management 
approval for staff actions that deviate from the bank’s CIP policies, procedures, and processes.  
When assessing internal controls and CIP compliance, examiners should keep in mind that the 
bank may have limited instances of noncompliance with the CIP rule (such as isolated or 
technical violations) or minor deviations from the bank’s CIP policies, procedures, and processes 
without resulting in an inadequate CIP.   

Examiners should determine whether the bank’s internal controls for CIP are designed to assure 
ongoing compliance with the requirements and are commensurate with the bank’s size or 
complexity and organizational structure.  More information can be found in the Assessing the 
BSA/AML Compliance Program - BSA/AML Internal Controls section of this Manual. 

49 FinCEN, Federal Reserve, FDIC, NCUA, OCC, OTS, Treasury (April 28, 2005), “Interagency Interpretive 
Guidance on Customer Identification Program Requirements under Section 326 of the USA PATRIOT Act.” 
50 Federal Reserve, FDIC, FinCEN, NCUA, and OCC (March 21, 2016), “Interagency Guidance to Issuing Banks on 
Applying Customer Identification Program Requirements to Holders of Prepaid Cards.” 
51 FDIC (August 29, 2017), FIL-38-2017 “Meeting the Financial Needs of Customers Affected by Hurricane Harvey 
and its Aftermath.”  Federal Reserve (March 29, 2013), SR 13-6 “Supervisory Practices Regarding Banking 
Organizations and their Borrowers and Other Customers Affected by a Major Disaster or Emergency.”  NCUA 
(December 14, 2017), SL No. 17-02 “Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster.”  OCC 
(November 14, 2012), NR 2012-164 “Agencies Issue Supplemental Statement on Supervisory Practices Regarding 
Financial Institutions and Borrowers Affected by Hurricane Sandy.”  

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

9 

February 2021 

 
 
                                                 
Customer Identification Program Examination and Testing Procedures 

CUSTOMER IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM EXAMINATION 
AND TESTING PROCEDURES 

Objective:  Assess the bank’s compliance with the BSA regulatory requirements for the 
Customer Identification Program (CIP). 

1.  Verify that the bank has a written CIP appropriate for its size and type of business.  The 

written program must be included within the bank’s BSA/AML compliance program and 
must contain procedures that address: 

•  Obtaining the required identifying information (including name, date of birth for an 

individual, address, and identification number). 

•  Verifying the identity of each customer to the extent reasonable and practicable through 

risk-based procedures. 

•  Responding to circumstances in which the bank cannot form a reasonable belief that it 
knows the true identity of a customer, including determining when a suspicious activity 
report (SAR) should be filed. 

•  Complying with recordkeeping requirements. 

•  Timely checking of new accounts against prescribed government lists, if applicable.   

•  Providing adequate customer notice. 

•  Relying on another financial institution that has an AML compliance program and is 

regulated by a federal functional regulator, if applicable. 

2.  Verify that the bank establishes appropriate controls and review procedures for its 

relationships with third parties, if applicable.  If the bank is using a third party, such as an 
agent or service provider, to perform elements of its CIP, determine whether the bank has 
procedures in place to monitor for and ensure adequate performance. 

3.  Determine whether the bank’s CIP appropriately considers the types of accounts maintained; 
methods of account opening; the types of identifying information available; and the bank’s 
size, location, and customer base. 

4.  Select a sample of new accounts opened since the most recent examination to review for 

compliance with the bank’s CIP.  The sample should include a cross-section of accounts as 
indicated by the bank’s risk assessment (e.g., consumers and businesses, loans and deposits, 
credit card relationships, and accounts opened via U.S. mail and online).  The sample should 
also, on a risk basis, include the following: 

•  New accounts opened using the exception for customers that have applied for a TIN. 

•  New accounts opened using documentary methods, and new accounts opened using non-

documentary methods. 

•  New accounts identified by the bank as higher risk.  

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

10 

February 2021 

Customer Identification Program Examination and Testing Procedures 

•  New accounts opened with incomplete verification information, if applicable. 

•  New accounts opened by a third party as the bank’s agent (e.g., indirect loans), if 

applicable. 

5.  From the previous sample of new accounts, determine whether the bank has performed the 

following procedures: 

•  Opened the account in accordance with the bank’s policies, procedures, and processes for 

CIP. 

•  Obtained from each customer, before opening the account, the identifying information 
required by the CIP:  name, date of birth (for an individual), address, and identification 
number.   

•  Verified the identity of the customer at account opening, or within a reasonable time after 

account opening, to the extent reasonable and practicable.   

•  Appropriately resolved situations in which customer identity could not be reasonably 

verified and filed SARs, as appropriate.   

•  Made and maintained a record of the identifying information required by the CIP 

regulations; a description of any document that was relied upon to verify identity; the 
methods and results of any measures undertaken to verify identity using non-
documentary methods or additional verification procedures; and verification results 
(including results of substantive discrepancies).   

•  Compared the customer’s name against any list of known or suspected terrorists or 

terrorist organizations, if applicable.   

6.  Review the adequacy of the bank’s customer notice and the timing of the notice’s delivery.  

7.  If the bank relies on other financial institutions to perform its CIP (or portions of its CIP), 

select a sample of new accounts opened under the reliance provision. 

•  Determine whether the bank’s customer is opening or has opened an account at, or has 
established a similar formal banking or business relationship with, the other financial 
institution to provide or engage in services, dealings, or other financial transactions.   

•  Determine whether the other financial institution is subject to a final rule implementing 

the AML program requirements of 31 USC 5318(h) and is regulated by a federal 
functional regulator.   

•  Review the contract between the parties, annual certifications, and other information, 

such as the other financial institution’s CIP.   

•  Determine whether reliance is reasonable.  The contract and certification provide a 

standard means for a bank to demonstrate that it has satisfied the “reliance provision,” 
unless the examiner has reason to believe that the bank’s reliance is not reasonable (e.g., 
the other financial institution has been subject to an enforcement action for AML or BSA 
deficiencies or violations). 

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

11 

February 2021 

Customer Identification Program Examination and Testing Procedures 

8.  Review the internal controls in place for CIP.  Determine whether the bank’s internal 
controls are designed to assure ongoing compliance with CIP requirements and are 
commensurate with the bank’s size or complexity and organizational structure.   

9.  Review any identified instances of noncompliance with the CIP rule and any deviations from 

the bank’s CIP policies, procedures, and processes to determine whether the bank is 
effectively implementing its CIP.  In making this determination, examiners should keep in 
mind that the bank may have limited instances of noncompliance with the CIP rule (such as 
isolated or technical violations) or minor deviations from the bank’s CIP policies, 
procedures, and processes without resulting in an inadequate CIP.   

10. On the basis of examination and testing procedures completed, form a conclusion about the 
adequacy of policies, procedures, and processes the bank has developed to meet BSA 
regulatory requirements associated with CIP. 

FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual 

12 

February 2021 

 
