How to run a 
Civic Lottery: 
Designing 
fair selection 
mechanisms 
for deliberative 
public processes

A Guide and License  
Version 1.4

GNU Free 
Documentation 
License

Copyright (C)  2017  MASS LBP Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this doc
ment under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, 
Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software 
Foundation; with the Invariant Sections being: A few words of 
welcome; Civic Lottery Invitiation Package; Democracy and 
decision-making beyond elections; The real world of democracy; 
What is a Civic Lottery?; Why run a Civic Lottery?; Benefits of a Civic 
Lottery; Randomness: How it works and why it’s useful ; Using Civic 
Lotteries; Elements of a Civic Lottery; Using Civic Lotteries; What 
for updates; and Gratitude with the Front-Cover Texts being “How 
to run a Civic Lottery: Designing fair selection mechanisms for 
deliberative public processes; A Guide and License by MASS LBP”, 
and with the Back-Cover Texts being (none).  

A copy of the license is included in the section entitled “GNU Free 
Documentation License.”

The MASS LBP (Inc.) logo should not be reproduced without  

our approval.

Nanna Koekoek was commissioned by MASS LBP to create the 

illustrations in this guide. They should not be reproduced without 

our approval.

Contact information: MASS LBP at 3A Gilead Place, Toronto, 

Ontario, M5A 3C8, Canada; hello@masslbp.com; 1-800-369-7136.

A few words 
of welcome

One of our favourite days at MASS HQ is when the 
return envelopes start to arrive. It begins as a trickle, 
with just one or two letters coming in with the morning 
mail. Within a week, our long-suffering mail carrier is 
dropping them off by the bundle.

During the next three weeks, my colleagues spend an hour or two 

each day, gathered around a table, slicing open envelopes and 

entering each response into a database. Very quickly, two piles of 

sorted mail start to grow: the Yes pile and the No pile. 

Since 2007, we have been conducting a practical experiment to 

demonstrate that citizens can and want to play a much more 

active role in helping to shape the policies that shape their lives. 

Exactly how this works and what we have learned will be the 

subject of our next guide. For now, we want to explain one of the 

components that has made this experiment so successful: the 

Civic Lottery.

With the assistance of Canada Post, we have sent more than 

300,000 letters to Canadian households on behalf of dozens of 

different ministries, city councils, and public agencies. Each enve-

lope is brown with a government logo printed on the front. In every 

respect it looks like any other important piece of mail you might 

receive from the government — including, not accidentally, a tax bill.  

What you discover when you open one of these envelopes is some-

thing very different. It’s not a court summons, an opinion survey, or 

a statement of money owed. Instead, it is an invitation to take part 

in what is still a very rare feature of democratic life: a policy jury 

whose members will spend several days learning about a public 

issue, representing their community, working towards consensus, 

and issuing detailed recommendations to government. At MASS, 

we call these juries “Reference Panels” because governments refer 

issues to these juries, which then refer back detailed recommen-

dations. They might concern health care,  infrastructure, privacy 

regulations,  urban planning, or any number of issues that matter 

to a community.

To us these letters are a bit like the “golden tickets” in Roald Dahl’s 

beloved book Charlie and the Chocolate Factory. They come as a 

surprise and can lead recipients to some unexpected places. And 

they require that the recipient —just like Charlie—  starts by saying 

“yes.” 

3

Our work with Civic Lotteries and Reference Panels has taught us 

a number of things about contemporary political life and how we 

might create a culture of more active and vibrant citizenship. It has 

also fuelled our confidence in the quiet wisdom and basic decen-

cy of most people who exceed all expectations when offered the 

chance to give something back or make something better. 

By publishing this guide and explaining our techniques, our hope is 

that more jurisdictions will come to use Civic Lotteries  

as a mechanism to bring a much wider range of voices to the  

policy-making table. 

Peter MacLeod 

Principal, MASS LBP

4

Democracy 
and decision-
making 
beyond 
elections

For many people, democracy begins and ends at the 
ballot box. Every four or so years, voters are called 
upon locally, provincially, or federally to cast their 
vote, and politicians come out of the woodwork to try 
to persuade citizens to cast it for them. 

Agendas are presented. Doors are knocked on. Promises are made. 

Attention is piqued. The newscasts are awash in the story of the 

day — the gaffe, the flub, the attack ad, the zippy one-liner. Lawns 

are filled with signs. “That’s democracy in action,” everyone says. 

And then, as suddenly as it began, the election is over.

Once the dust is settled and winners are declared, everyone gets 

on with their lives and waits for the next contest. But democracy 

doesn’t end with elections. In fact, elections are just the beginning 

of the democratic process — and they’re imperfect beginnings 

at that. Electoral democracy is good at forming governments 

and holding politicians more or less accountable by rewarding or 

punishing them based on their ideas, characters, and past perfor-

mances. But with few exceptions, elections are lousy at indicating 

support for, or opposition to, specific policies. 

Even though candidates and parties may run on very detailed 

platforms that offer promises and ideas about what they’ll do if 

elected, it’s hard to tell why a voter casts a ballot for one person 

over another.  It’s just as hard to know which policy or policies 

(if any) they support or oppose. Even polls, which can tell us, on 

aggregate, a bit about public support for a given policy during a 

particular point in time, tell only part of the story — and they carry a 

high risk of error.

Consequently, after elections governments begin seeking public 

input, either to build political capital or generate support for some 

proposal or another, or else to come up with ideas for how to solve 

specific issues. This desire for input from citizens is great news for 

democracy, since regular public participation in the political deci-

sion-making process generates all kinds of good outcomes. It can 

build civic capacity and trust, and also ensure that the people get 

what they want. This is what should happen in a democracy. After 

all, it is the people’s government. 

But this is also where theory and practice often fall apart. Far too 

often, public consultations happen too late, discuss little of sub-

stance, or reach only a fraction of the population. To public ser-

vants and members of the public alike, consultation can feel like a 

tick box exercise. It is a necessary but not especially consequential 

part of the policy process.  Worse is that townhall meetings, dep-

5

utations, and letter-writing campaigns —to name just three of the 

most common approaches to soliciting input— are each highly sus-

ceptible to political hijacking by partisan or special interests. It’s all 

too easy to stack a town hall with highly-motivated supporters or 

opponents of some proposition, just as it’s all too easy to now use 

social media to swamp the phone lines or inboxes of a politician.

Civic Lotteries are an important tool that governments and public 

agencies can use to broaden participation while also guarding 

against the disproportionate influence of organized interests hop-

ing to move a crowd and sway an outcome. They are also based 

on one of our oldest democratic traditions which is called sortition, 

and means a process for randomly selecting people to serve a 

public function much as we do when we convene a jury. Civic Lot-

teries use similar principles. They make it possible for governments 

and public agencies to assemble a broadly representative sample 

of people to discuss and decide on an issue, free from the pres-

sures of outside influences.

For the past decade, MASS LBP has been running Civic Lotteries 

for a wide array of governments and public agencies. More than 

300,000 households in Canada have received letters inviting them 

to take part in deciding how their community should be governed. 

Nearly 2,000 people have taken part in deliberative decision-mak-

ing processes that have lasted from a few days to upwards of two 

weeks spread out over several months. That’s nearly 2,000 individ-

uals who have had a chance to exercise their citizenship: who have 

opted in to the important practice of democratic engagement, of 

deciding how we should live together. These participants not only 

became active agents of self-government; they also built civic skill-

sets that can be used to improve their lives and the lives of others 

while helping to ensure that governments are responsive to the 

people they are elected to serve. 

In the following pages, you’ll find a clear and comprehensive step-

by-step guide on how to run a Civic Lottery. No matter how big the 

population you serve, no matter how many participants you wish 

to engage, and no matter how tricky the problem you’re looking to 

address, this guide sets the standard for organizations and govern-

ments who wish to invite and select individuals to become a part of 

a deliberative decision-making process.

6

The real world 
of democracy

Governments and other public organizations 
regularly consult and engage with citizens, residents, 
and members when they make decisions. 

Traditionally, institutions that wish to engage in a consultation pro-

cess issue start with an “open call” to recruit participants for their 

town hall meeting, online forum, or committee. These institutions 

try to increase responses to the “open call” by encouraging people 

to participate through advertising and other forms of marketing. In 

many cases, respondents may then participate directly in the en-

gagement process, such as a town hall meeting, just by showing up. 

In some cases, participants are vetted by the institution through an 

application or selection process, such as before appearing in front 

of a special committee. 

Public institutions may also use a “closed call” model to recruit 

members of the public to participate in consultations. In this case, 

public servants or politicians ask handpicked members of the 

community who have specific experience or technical expertise to 

participate, such as for a committee or board of directors. Partic-

ipants can be selected on merit, their affiliation with an interest 

group, experience, or because of their role in the community.  

Both the open and closed recruitment methods usually generate 

a non-representative cross-section of the population — that is, a 

sample that does not mirror the demographics of the community, 

such as gender, age, income, education, and so forth. The design 

of these two types of selection processes may thus create unfair 

results — either through direct manipulation (for instance, giving a 

seat on a blue ribbon panel to a trusted friend) or through poor or 

uneven recruitment techniques (for instance, using only online reg-

istrations). Thus there are shortcomings of both open and closed 

calls because not everyone has an equal chance at selection.

That’s the bad news. The good news is that there’s a way to fix the 

problems of representativeness and fairness when consulting the 

public. How? Through sortition, also known as random selection, 

by a process known as “the Civic Lottery”. This guide will walk you 

through that process, MASS LBP’s approach to recruiting partici-

pants for public consultation or engagement processes. 

We have designed our Civic Lottery process to mitigate the short-

comings and distortions produced by traditional recruitment 

methods. In order to do so, our approach introduces randomiza-

tion at multiple stages of the participant recruitment and selection 

process. This randomization ensures that the process is fair, since 

nearly every person has an equal opportunity of being invited to 

7

participate. Moreover, through selective sortition, the process also 

ensures that the randomly-selected group is ultimately more repre-

sentative of the community from which they are drawn. Since 2007, 

MASS LBP has designed and implemented over 30 Civic Lotteries 

to select participants for Citizens’ Reference Panels, which are also 

known as citizens’ juries.

8

What is a  
Civic Lottery?

Imagine that you have a problem you want to solve. 
The problem is complex or values-based (or both) and 
those who will be affected by what you choose to do 
disagree about what ought to be done. 

So, you decide you’re going to get those people together to discuss 

options, weigh the pros and cons of each option, and decide on a 

plan. The tricky thing is that there are far too many people and not 

nearly enough time to consult each of them in a meaningful way. 

Lucky for you, the Civic Lottery exists.

The Civic Lottery is a process for randomly choosing individuals 

from within a specific population so that you can assemble them to 

discuss a given issue and come up with recommendations for what 

should be done. The process is based on a simple, random, and fair 

procedure that has been used throughout the world for centuries — 

the drawing of lots.

Those who wish to run a Civic Lottery (the conveners) first decide 

on: (a) the population they are ultimately working to represent 

through the civic lottery; (b) the number of individuals to be select-

ed; (c) the basic demographic criteria that will be used to ensure 

the selected group broadly represents the population at large; 

and (d) the method for inviting a set number of randomly chosen 

individuals from within that population to volunteer. 

Lots are drawn when randomly selected individuals are chosen 

to receive invitations. Often the invitation is in the form of a letter 

sent by mail to several thousand randomly selected households. 

Whatever method is chosen for distributing invitations, it should 

gives everyone in the population roughly the same chance of being 

invited to volunteer. The invitation explains that the recipient is 

being asked to volunteer to help the convenor solve a problem that 

affects the population, and that, if selected, they will be working 

with others on behalf of the whole population to develop solutions. 

Those who volunteer are asked to provide basic demographic infor-

mation required for the lottery process, but are not asked to make 

a case for why they should be selected — as long as they meet the 

basic eligibility criteria, they are placed into the pool of volunteers. 

From amongst the pool of volunteers, the civic lottery process 

draws lots again by randomly selecting individuals in such a way 

that the selected participants match the demographic criteria for 

representation (for instance, an even gender balance). Finally, se-

lected participants are contacted to offer them a role working with 

others to provide advice to the convenor. 

9

Why run a 
Civic Lottery?

10

Good public policy doesn’t just serve people, it also 
reflects their preferences — that is, it serves them in 
the way they want to be served. 

It is often tempting to say to folks, “Trust us, we know what we’re 

doing”, and to proceed with those individuals in mind while other-

wise keeping them outside the decision-making process. But there 

is value in having those affected by policy take part in making 

decisions. 

In political science, there’s a concept known as the “all-affected 

interests principle.” The notion here is that in a democracy those 

affected by a decision ought to have a chance to take part in 

shaping that decision. This idea reflects a moral commitment to 

treating people as active agents who can self-govern, rather than 

as passive objects who must be governed. 

Civic Lotteries enable conveners to bring people into decision-mak-

ing processes, connecting them with the organizations and govern-

ments that shape their lives; in doing so, they live up to the high bar 

set by the all-affected interests principle. But that’s not all. When 

lotteries are paired with deliberative mechanisms such as citizen’ 

juries, they also build trust and produce more legitimate outcomes 

— people like and respect decisions more when they and people like 

them participate. 

Plus, research suggests that diverse groups of decision makers  

—the sort you can put together through a Civic Lottery— are better 

at problem solving, and at coming up with creative solutions to 

tricky problems. And, on top of it all, Civic Lotteries are great at 

solving a very old problem in politics: the makeup of participation.

The problem of who shows up
As long as democracies have been around, they’ve had a pesky, 

persistent problem: certain people tend to show up to take part in 

the decision-making process more often than other sorts of people. 

For instance, these days, voter turnout skews older. Sure, voting is 

only a part of democratic life, but the sampling problem applies 

elsewhere, too. Surveys, town halls, protests, letters to elected 

representatives, and other regular features of civic engagement 

also tend to over-represent certain populations. That’s a problem 

for those who want to make policy that reflects the diversity of their 

community.

Civic Lotteries solve the problem of who shows up by allowing conve-

ners to randomly select participants from a predetermined popula-

tion or set of populations. Say, for instance, you want to make a poli-

cy that disproportionately affects a particular socio-economic group, 

the members of which tend to shy away from the political process. 

Town halls and letter campaigns can easily be captured by special, 

powerful interests. But a Civic Lottery designed to include a specific 

proportion of members from the socio-economic group in question 

ensures that this group will be represented at the decision-making 

table. It can also insulate the process from the overwhelming influ-

ence of partisan, moneyed, or special interests.

11

Benefits of a 
Civic Lottery

So far we have touched on some of the benefits of a 
Civic Lottery, but there are a few particular, central 
goods to keep in mind. Civic Lotteries ensure that 
the chance of receiving an invitation to the public 
engagement process is equal for all. 

No one can buy or strong-arm their way into the process. With 

Civic Lotteries, money doesn’t talk, nor do special connections 

or partisan affiliation. The Civic Lottery approach protects the 

democratic engagement process from the disproportionate 

influence of self-interested, self-organized groups, such as ad hoc 

neighbourhood groups who might not represent the views of their 

community. Accordingly, the process is inherently fair from the 

get-go. Also, since the opportunity to participate is also equal for 

all those who wish to take part, the process remains fair through-

out. Not only does each person in a particular population have 

an equal chance to being invited, they have a similarly equal 

opportunity to be selected once they accept their invitation to 

take part. 

On top of fairness, those who are ultimately selected to participate 

in a Civic Lottery will also reasonably mirror the demographics 

of the community from which they have been selected, so the 

process produces a representative selection. However, conveners 

may choose to adjust the process, at the outset, to plan for any 

special equity considerations that they may have. So, the process 

can be tailored to be random, representative, and also appropri-

ate for whatever sort of decision needs to be made in whichever 

community, for instance by giving disproportionate consideration 

to Indigenous peoples, particular linguistic communities, or other 

traditional or cultural groups.

This process bring an appropriately diverse, balanced set of per-

spectives to bear on the issue at hand. Because of this, the public is 

likely to view the recommendations produced as being a good ap-

proximation of the public will. If these recommendations are care-

fully considered and incorporated by the convenor, their decisions 

end up enjoying higher levels of legitimacy and public support.

12

Randomness: 
How it works 
and why  
it’s useful

13

Civic Lotteries are built on the principle of sortition, 
or random selection, which maximizes fairness by 
ensuring that each person has an equal chance of 
being selected. 

Randomness isn’t magic, but it is so simple and useful  that it can 

seem like it is. A simple, intuitive example can help us understand 

how it works. Let’s take the instance of a game of baseball being 

played on a primary school playground.

Imagine two teams are about to play a game and they need to 

decide who bats first. Both teams agree to have an umpire flip a 

coin, and one of the captains calls heads or tails. Whoever wins the 

coin toss gets to bat first. So far, so good.

The umpire tosses the coin, the team that wins goes to bat, and the 

team that loses takes the field. The team headed to the field must 

first decide who will be catcher — a position that few people want 

to play. So, to decide on who will play catcher, the players agree to 

draw straws. They find nine straws of equal length and shorten one. 

The straws are grouped together and the length of each is hidden. 

Each player then picks a straw. The player who draws the short 

straw loses and must play catcher. 

At the same time, the team that’s first up to bat must decide on a 

batting order. Again, the players agree to draw straws—but they do 

it a little differently than the other team. They too find nine identi-

cal straws of equal length. However, they cut each straw so there 

are nine different lengths. The straws are grouped together and 

their lengths are hidden. The player who draws the shortest straw 

bats last, the player who draws the second-shortest straw bats 

second to last, and so on, through to the player who draws the 

longest straw, who bats first. 

The limits of randomness and some solutions
While randomization can be used to create a fair process in theory, 

it doesn’t always make for a fair process in practice, especially 

once things become more complicated than a coin-toss. 

For example, sometimes exceptions need to be made to support 

the fairness of the game and the rules that enable that fairness. In 

the case of baseball, for instance, the umpire is never allowed to 

play. It is accepted that umpires cannot both fairly enforce the rules 

and play. They can do one or the other. Even if the decision of what 

team the umpire played for was “decided” by a fair coin toss or by 

drawing straws, their mere presence on the team would create 

unfairness or perceived unfairness, which undermines the game. 

These are the sorts of fairness considerations that must inform the 

design of a random selection process. These design elements be-

come even more complex when one of the most important values 

or principles of a process is “representation” — a consideration that 

changes how the process is designed.

Let’s go back to the example of a baseball game at an elementary 

school. This time, two schools agree to play a game of baseball 

against each other, with the pride of each school at stake. Howev-

er, the schools also agree to a rule that each team must represent 

their school’s strengths and weaknesses equally — no school can 

stack its teams with just the best players. The students of each 

school, regardless of whether they want to play baseball or not, 

understand that it is their duty to offer to play. 

The first school, which has 200 students, decides to draw straws to 

select the nine players for their team. Two hundred identical straws 

of equal length are found and nine are cut short. The straws are 

grouped together with their lengths hidden. Each student picks a 

straw. The students who draw the short straws are selected as the 

school’s representative baseball players. 

This process is random and fair, but the makeup of the team is not 

fair in the eyes of many students. There are equal numbers of girls 

and boys in the school, but through random selection, eight of the 

nine players selected are boys — which is an entirely possible out-

come when selecting a small number of participants from a large 

pool of candidates. 

So, the school’s principal decides to redesign the selection game. 

This time, two games of drawing straws are held: one to select five 

players from amongst the boy students and one to select five play-

ers from amongst the girls. That gives the team ten players — but 

only nine are needed. The last girl and last boy selected by straws 

then face off to flip a coin — the winner of this coin-toss is selected 

to become the ninth player on the team.

This final iteration of the selection process solved two different 

problems at once: first, it made the selection of individual players 

fair, and second, it ensured that the final baseball team was repre-

sentative of both genders.

This is the basic logic used in the design of the Civic Lottery.

14

Elements of a 
Civic Lottery

There are several elements of a Civic Lottery. These 
parts overlap to make the Civic Lottery a great choice 
for policymakers whenever they’re looking to engage 
members of a population in a deliberative democratic 
process.

Equality of opportunity 
The Civic Lottery process creates an equal opportunity for all indi-

viduals in a given population to receive an invitation to participate 

in the engagement process. In addition, the process creates an 

equal opportunity for those who volunteer to be selected to partic-

ipate in the engagement process. This opportunity is provided by 

randomization, which, regardless of the specific tools used to con-

duct the random selection, is inherently consistent and unbiased.

Representativeness
The Civic Lottery process further promotes equal opportunity for 

all residents or citizens by ensuring that proportional numbers of 

subpopulations (according to gender, age, location, and so forth) 

can be randomly selected for the public engagement process — 

thus mirroring the wider population according to the needs of the 

engagement process while respecting social norms of equality and 

inclusiveness. 

Defensibility
The Civic Lottery process removes the possibility of human inter-

vention —and meddling— from the invitation and selection process, 

ensuring that results are unbiased and can be defended when 

subjected to public scrutiny. 

Consistency 
The Civic Lottery process is able to consistently and predictably 

recruit a group of participants for a wide range of public engage-

ment processes on a broad set of topics. While the particular 

makeup of each iteration will vary according to the needs of the 

conveners, the process itself is consistently random and fair.

15

How to run a 
Civic Lottery

In this section we provide an in-depth, step-by-step 
guide to running a Civic Lottery. 

First, within a Civic Lottery, there are typically three stages of ran-

domization: 

1. 

the initial invitees who receive an invitation; 

2. 

the combination of the demographics or other  

participant criteria;  

or the combination of representative criteria, primarily 

demographics; 

or the combination of criteria that define representativeness 

for each participant, primary demographics; and

3. 

the participants who match the combined or  

bundled criteria.

Next, the Civic Lottery itself comprises four steps for preparing 

the process and selecting panelists who will participate in policy 

making.

Step 1: Defining the Task and Parameters 

The process conveners identify a target population or “public” in re-

lation to the consultation issue; they set the rules of the lottery, and 

they set participant criteria. If needed, a formal Terms of Reference 

can publicly document the rules, criteria, and consultation issue.

Step 2: Inviting Volunteers 

The conveners randomly select the initial target population and 

they design, deliver, and manage the invitation message, plan, 

and tool(s).  

Step 3: Registering and Validating Volunteers 

The conveners collect responses from volunteers and validate them 

against the lottery rules — typically disqualifications.

Step 4: Selecting Panelists 

The conveners transfer the population criteria to “lots,” from which 

they randomly select individuals and create participant profiles. 

They then randomly select validated volunteers, matching each 

participant profile, forming a final group representative of the 

population. Finally, they inform the selected, validated participants 

and confirm their participation. 

16

Step 1: 
Defining the 
Task and 
Parameters

17

Define the issue: A government, public institution, or organization 

identifies and defines an issue or a decision that requires public 

consultation. 

Examples (used onward): 

1.  To fund public transit across several cities, for instance by 

raising taxes (Burlington, London, and York);

2.  To develop an amalgamation plan for the municipalties of 

Township of Creemore and the City of Cardigan;

3.  To change the services offerings of the cancer treatment 

program at a local hospital (Sacred Heart);

4.  To develop a new federal pharmaceutical drug policy.

Define the “public”: The conveners define the “public” in relation to 

the issue or decision to be made. This population may be identified 

by geography, demographics, social traits, shared experience, or 

any combination of these or other relevant considerations. 

Examples: 

1.  Residents of the cities of Burlington, London, and York; 

2.  Residents of the Town of Creemore and City of Cardigan;

3.  Residents within the service catchment or radius of the 

Sacred Heart Hospital;

4.  Citizens or permanent residents of Canada.

Establish the exclusionary criteria for bias: The conveners define 

criteria for excluding participation by certain types of individuals 

based on a series of rules in relation to the issue or decision to be 

made. This is done to mitigate any bias in participant selection that 

could undermine the engagement process. 

Examples: 

1.  Elected councillors, employees, or committee members of 

the cities of Burlington, London, and York, and public transit 

employees;

2.  Elected councillors, employees, or committee members of 

both municipalities;

3.  Employees and board members of Sacred Heart Hospital; 

local, provincial, and federal government employees; local, 

provincial, and federal politicians;

4.  Local, provincial, and federal politicians; employees or 

advocates for the pharmaceutical sector.

Establish other exclusionary criteria: The conveners may also estab-

lish other exclusionary criteria based on traditions or legal rights, 

including status of citizenship, voting age, prisoners, and so forth. 

Examples: 

1.  Citizens or residents alike; anyone 16 years and older; 

2.  Citizens or residents alike who live in the municipalities; 

anyone of legal voting age;

3.  Citizens or residents alike; anyone 16 years and older;

4.  Citizens or permanent residents of Canada; anyone of legal 

voting age.

Decide whether this is an open or closed recruitment process. 

Most Civic Lotteries are closed processes. In a closed recruitment 

process, only members of the defined population who have re-

ceived a verified ballot (by mail, email, telephone, etc.) are eligi-

ble to volunteer. This reduces the ability of stakeholders, special 

interests, and frequent participants to swamp the lottery process 

while increasing the chances that those who traditionally do not 

participate end up getting selected. 

In an open recruitment process, anyone within the defined pop-

ulation who fits the criteria is eligible to volunteer, regardless of 

whether they have received an invitation. Open recruitment pro-

cesses are more likely to involve those who are already participat-

ing via other avenues (such as open meetings and online surveys).

18

Step 2: 
Inviting 
Volunteers

A: The conveners source a universal contact list for the population 

and randomly select a subset of individuals to receive invitations. 

The contact list should be universal in order to give everyone in the 

population roughly the same chance of receiving the inivitation. 

The number of invitees included to receive an invitation depends 

on several variables, including total population size of the polity, 

method of distributing invitations, expected level of interest in the 

issue, and project budget. 

Examples: 

1.  Municipal property tax assessment rolls;

2.  Address lists provided by the postal system;

3.  Cancer care patient and family members list; 

4.  A universal marketing list.

B: The conveners can define subsections within the larger popu-

lation of invitees and ensure that a certain number of invitees are 

within each subsection. These subsections should mirror traditional 

or well-known divisions to ensure that they will be accepted as fair 

by the public.

Examples: 

1.  The borders and populations of the three cities;

2.  The borders and electoral wards of Creemore (5) and 

Cardigan (7);

3.  The borders and populations of the three health areas;

4.  The borders and populations of the thirteen provinces and 

territories.

C: For closed recruitment processes, the conveners give each invi-

tation a unique code that is used to verify each Civic Lottery ballot. 

The codes should be randomly generated numbers with at least 

one security feature, such as a check digit* to ensure the code is 

legitimate. Keycodes should also be linked to the original contact 

information in order to provide a second method of verification 

to ensure the ballot was not traded to someone other than the 

intended recipient.

19

* https:⋅⋅en.wikipedia.org⋅wiki⋅Check_digit

Example: 

Keycode: AA 231218424

Address: #13-1273 Hammond Street, Toronto, Ontario

Breakout:

AA ⋅ 23 ⋅ 12 ⋅ 184 ⋅ 24

AA (simple ID tags), 23 (block #1), 12 (block #2), 184 (block #3),  24 (address #)

Security feature 1: the first key (1.5) is used to calculate the third 

block from the first two:

23 (block #1) × 12 (block #2) ÷ 1.5 (key #1) = 184 (block #3) 

Security feature 2: the second key (0.7) is used to calculate the ad-

dress block (24) from the digits in the street address (#13-1273):

1 + 3 + 1 + 2 + 7 + 3 = 17

17 ÷ 0.7 (key #2) = 24.28 (address #) 

A note about check digits and validation: 

There are many other methods to create verifiable codes and  

validation features to ensure a Civic Lottery remains fair and 

secure. The above is one of the ways that MASS LBP uses to 

create our own keycodes. One piece of advice that we like to 

share — ensure that any validation method that you choose or 

design does not create a barrier to entry, excess frustration for 

the volunteer, and/or an accessibilty issue. 

D: The conveners send an invitation to each selected contact, typi-

cally a mailed package (though email and telephone call methods 

have been explored). A mailed invitation package generally con-

tains an introductory letter, information sheet, response form, and 

return envelope, packaged in an addressed and branded outer 

envelope. The invitation should address seven important pieces of 

information: 

1.  An introduction to the convening public institution;

20

2.  An introduction to the problems or issues;

3.  An introduction to the selection and engagement process;

4.  An outline of the rules and exclusions of the selection process;

5.  An introduction to the specific issue to be addressed;

6.  The request to volunteer, which includes: volunteer dates, 

deadlines, methods of registration, and other information 

pertaining to the process; and

7.  An outline of the responsibilities of volunteers if selected by 

the lottery. 

E: The target population should receive the invitations four to six 

weeks before the registration deadline. This gives the invitees time 

to consider participating, decide what to do, and respond to con-

veners. This length of time ensures a reasonable turnout since it al-

lows possible participants to organize their schedules (work, family, 

etc.) and underlines the seriousness or importance of the process. 

21

Step 3: 
Registering 
and 
Validating 
Volunteers

A: Invitees are generally given multiple ways to respond to the 

request — for example, by returning a response form included in the 

invitation package, by phoning the Civic Lottery’s coordinators, or 

by filling out a secure online form. 

The conveners then check the volunteers’ information for complete-

ness and, for closed recruitment processes, validate their keycodes. 

They remove from the lottery any volunteer with missing informa-

tion or who does not have a valid keycode. 

Base registration information:

The following registration information collects all necessary infor-

mation to allow the convenor to randomly select a representative 

group based on age, gender, and location of residence.

1.  Response: Yes or No

2.  Availability and Commitment: Yes or No

3.  Keycode

4.  First Name

5.  Last Name

6.  Address

7.  City/Town

8.  Province, State, or Territory

9.  Postal Code or Zip Code

10.  Primary Phone Number

11.  Secondary Phone Number

12.  Email

13.  Age Bracket

14.  Self-Identified Gender

15.  Information Collection Acknowledgement  

(based on laws and common practice)

B: In some cases, other information is necessary to gather a prop-

erly representative group of volunteers through the lottery process. 

Examples: 

1.  Homeowner or renter;

2.  Duration of residence in town; 

22

3.  Whether they are a former or current cancer patient, or the 

family member of a former or current cancer patient; 

4. 

Indigenous or Aboriginal,  or visible minority or 

Francophone.

A note about criteria and registrant information: 

Keep the number of criteria that define representation reason-

5. 

able. The more criteria you add to the process of selection the 

more difficult the lottery will become to conduct and less oppor-

tunity volunteers within the lottery will have of beening select-

ed. With too many critera the lottery will become “locked up.” 

Some additional advice: don’t treat the lottery like a survey. Ask 

only the information that you need. The length of the registra-

tion may be a barrier for volunteers and reduce the number of 

respondents.

C: Once the deadline has passed, conveners review all “Yes” re-

sponses, verify addresses and keycodes, and complete additional 

processing. The conveners review the list for duplicates and other 

possible issues (such as misspelled names, improperly format-

ted addresses, etc.). They resolve these issues if possible and log 

the way they were resolved. At this stage, conveners can tag the 

list with additional demographic or geographic information. For 

example, if geographic areas are being used as selection criteria 

for the lottery (such as electoral boundaries or natural borders), 

conveners look up, tag, and then re-verify each address to ensure 

accuracy. 

D: Throughout the registration and validation stage, conveners 

keep a log (in the form of a book or file) that documents critical 

changes to the list, such as the removal of volunteers due to unver-

ified keycodes, incorrect addresses, or other issues, such as volun-

teers from outside of the designated geographic area. Keeping 

a log helps ensure the selection process can be easily explained 

and that  any changes to the process or the list can be defended if 

scrutinized.

23

A: The panelist selection process has two stages: a) the creation, 

randomization, and cross-selection of demographic lots to create 

volunteer profiles; and b) the randomization and selection of bal-

lots to select participants. 

B: Civic Lotteries use three core selection criteria: gender, age by 

bracket, and location of residence. These selection criteria are 

derived from well-documented and publicly accepted population 

information — for example, the census. As noted above, a limited 

number of other criteria can be included. The total number of se-

lection lots per criterion equals the total number of people who will 

be selected to participate in the engagement process. The con-

veners define or create selection lots for each selection criterion 

based on their proportion in the larger population. This creates a 

system of “representation by population” based on each selection 

criterion.

Example:

A Civic Lottery is used to select 24 participants who will develop a 

new municipal strategic plan for the Town of Creemore.

Selection Criteria

Creemore Census

Lot Quantities 

Population: 

20,000

Criterion #1: Gender

Male

Female

Criterion #2: Age

18-39

40-59

60+

Criterion #3: Zone

Zone 1

Zone 2

Zone 3

Zone 4

9,750

10,250

3,000

5,000

12,000

3,000

9,000

3,000

5,000

24

12

12

4

6

14

4

10

4

6

Step 4: 
Selecting 
Panelists

24

C: The conveners then create Civic Lottery profiles by randomly 

selecting a single lot from across the criterion pool. Each profile is 

comprised of a bundle of randomly chosen selection criteria from 

each criterion category. 

Example (continued from above):

A random characteristic is selected from each criterion category to 

determine the profile of the first lot (Profile #1):

Criterion: Gender ⋅ Lot #1 ⋅ Selection: Female. (Remaining lots: 12 

Male and 11 Female lots)

Criterion: Age ⋅ Lot #1 ⋅ Selection: 60+. (Remaining lots: 4 of 18-39, 

6 of 40-59, 13 of 60+)

Criterion: Zone ⋅ Lot #1 ⋅ Selection: Zone 4. (Remaining lots: 4 of 

Zone 1, 10 of Zone 2, 4 of Zone 3, and 5 of Zone 4)

Profile #1: Female resident of Creemore, aged 60+, from Zone 4. 

D: The conveners then use the Civic Lottery profile (#1) to randomly 

select a volunteer from the respondents. Using the profile criteria, 

they identify all matching volunteers from the larger pool of volun-

teers and then randomly select a single participant as the “winner.” 

Example (continued from above): 

Profile #1: Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4

Gross Volunteer Pool

Profiles

Grace Jones

Patti Smith

Ian MacKaye

Björk Guðmundsdóttir

Robert Plant

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4

Male ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 1

Male ⋅ 18 -39 ⋅ Zone 1

Robert Fitzgerald Diggs

Male ⋅ 40 -39 ⋅ Zone 2

Gary Grice

Male ⋅ 18 -39 ⋅ Zone 2

Tahliah Debrett Barnett

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 3

Corey Woods

Clifford Smith

Merrill Beth Nisker

Male ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 1

Male ⋅ 40-59 ⋅ Zone 3

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4

…Continued…

…Continued…

25

Matching Volunteer Pool

Profiles

Grace Jones

Patti Smith

Merrill Beth Nisker

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4

Female ⋅ 60+ ⋅ Zone 4*

Profile #1 Winner: Merrill Beth Nisker

E: Conveners repeat the process until they have selected the total 

number of volunteers required (Method #1). Alternatively, conveners 

can randomly select all of the profiles first and then conduct the 

random selection of volunteers from the larger pool (Method #2). 

F: It is possible that no volunteers within the larger volunteer pool 

match a randomly selected profile. 

Using Method #1: conveners then break up the selected profile and 

return to the criterion pools for a redraw. They then redraw the 

profile and use the “new” profile to randomly select a new match-

ing volunteer. 

Using Method #2: conveners “unselect” the last two randomly 

selected volunteers and disassemble, or “break up”, the the corre-

sponding randomly selected profiles. The volunteers and their cri-

terion are returned to the selection pools. Conveners then redraw 

two profiles and use the two “new” profiles to randomly select two 

new matching volunteers. If this does not solve the issue, conveners 

break up a third profile, randomly select volunteers, and redraw 

three new profiles and volunteers. 

G: In the event of an impossible profile match because of an insuf-

ficient number of volunteers for a given criterion (such as age), the 

conveners must change the selection criteria. Prior to the start of 

the selection process, conveners should define a ranking of criteria 

based on the order of representative importance. Typically gender 

is the most important criterion and, therefore, fixed during the se-

lection process in order to ensure gender parity. However, depend-

ing on the needs of decision makers and the nature of the issue to 

be decided, changes may be made to age, geographic zone, or 

other criteria and their rankings may be amended. 

Examples: 

1.  Geographic zone will be more important than age because 

the issue is tied to taxes and transit, both highly related to 

geography;

26

2.  Geographic zone will be more important than age because 

the issue is municipal strategy, which is highly related to 

geography;

3.  Age will be more important than geographic zone because 

the issue is hospital services, which could be highly related 

to age;

4.  Age will be more important than geographic zone because 

the issue is pharmaceutical policy, which could be highly 

related to age. However, because of the tradition and 

relationship of federalism, this would be superseded by 

geographic representation. 

H: In the event of a volunteer resigning after selection, the conve-

ners reuse the criteria profile to reselect a new volunteer from the 

matching volunteer pool.

27

Using Civic 
Lotteries

28

MASS LBP has almost exclusively used the Civic Lottery 
process to select groups of citizens to be convened 
as members of out Citizens’ Reference Panels, which 
are akin to citizens’ juries. These panels are typically 
comprised of 24 to 36 volunteers who meet over four 
to six full-day sessions. 

The Citizens’ Reference Panel is led through a deliberative process 

in three phases: learning, deliberation, and recommendation. The 

goal of each panel is to create a series of well-informed recom-

mendations that are forwarded to the decision-making body that 

has a mandate to implement the recommendations, such as a city 

council, ministry, or board of directors. These recommendations 

can be used to develop new policies, inform decisions, or create 

new strategies or plans. 

Decision-makers are not obligated to implement all or any of the 

recommendations, but they have a responsibility to publicly ac-

knowledge and respond to them.

The Civic Lottery process could also be used to select a represen-

tative group of citizens, employees, members of organizations, 

students, and more, to serve on standing committees, boards of 

directors, online panels, and as judges for competitions.

Based on MASS LBP’s experience and observations from inviting 

and selecting volunteers to serve on Citizens’ Reference Panels, we 

have identified a set of consultation principles that help strengthen 

the outcomes of using a Civic Lottery:

1.  The issue the process will address must be specific and 

clearly explained in the invitation. Broad appeals to “think” 

about the future of an issue rarely work — instead, it should 

be framed as a “very real problem” that volunteers can work 

together to solve.

2.  The volunteers’ role in solving this problem should also be 

detailed along with the steps the volunteers will take during 

the process to reach consensus with others. 

3.  Prospective volunteers should understand that their 

participation is not guaranteed but will be confirmed by 

lottery.

4.  The public entity responsible for convening the process 

should be explicitly identified, as well as any commitments 

they have made to the process and its recommendations.

5.  The invitation should emphasize the importance of public 

service and that the volunteer will be responsible for 

representing their community — not only their personal views 

and interests. 

6.  A generous amount of time should be provided during the 

invitation stage of the process. More time gives possible 

volunteers the opportunity to think about volunteering 

and make necessary arrangements to their schedule and 

responsibilities should they be selected. Typically, this means 

at the very least six weeks from the reception of invitation 

until the first meeting of the panel.

7.  Volunteering for a Civic Lottery should be about public 

service and should not be motivated by monetary incentives. 

However, this does not preclude the use of supports or 

subsidies to ensure the process is open to all and barriers to 

entry are overcome.

29

Watch for 
Updates

This guide is based on MASS LBP’s ten years of 
experience with designing democratic engagement 
processes. 

When we started MASS, we didn’t know what we didn’t know. 

We had an idea of what a sortition process should look like, but we 

weren’t sure how —or if— it would work in practice.

Since then, we have designed and run over 30 Civic Lotteries and 

we’ve learned a great deal. We know three things to be true: our 

process works consistently; we learn something new with each new 

lottery, public issue, and project; and we improve our approach 

with each iteration of the lottery. 

So, treat this guide as a living document. Version 1.4. 

We will update and refine it in future versions as we continue to 

learn from our work.

In the meantime, please stay in touch and tell us about your work 

and what you’ve learned.

30

Gratitude

This paper is MASS LBP’s first attempt to document 
our experience using random selection, sortition, or in 
our words, Civic Lotteries.

Balancing the work of clients, volunteers, and business held us back 

from writing this document for too many years. 

For their work on this undertaking — we would like to thank: 

David Moscrop, Ph.D., Associate, MASS LBP; 

Joanna Massie, Coordinator, MASS LBP; and  

Patrick Baud, Associate, MASS LBP

Finally, we would also like the thank the many thousands of 

Canadians who have received one of our letters and took the 

‘democratic leap’ and volunteered. Their confidence, enthusiasm 

and desire to serve their community is the inspiration behind 

everything we do.

Chris Ellis 

Senior Director, MASS LBP

31

32

Glossary

33

Age bracket: a category that defines a span of ages. For instance, 

all volunteers or participants of and between the ages of 18 and 

24 can be defined by the age bracket of 18 to 24. Age brackets are 

a core selection criterion and are typically defined by or sourced 

from known sources of population reporting, such as national 

census data. 

Ballot, response form: a paper, digital form, or phone-in ballot 

that the volunteer must complete in its entirety and submit to enter 

the lottery. The ballot has basic identification questions (name, 

address, etc.) listed, as well as questions that are related to the 

selection criteria (age, gender, geographic area, and/or additional 

criteria). Each ballot is unique and is marked as such with a key-

code (see below).

Keycode: a unique alphanumeric code that identifies each ballot. 

Each keycode is linked to the individual mailing address to which 

the invitation was sent and the ballot which forms the response 

to the invitation. This ensures integrity of the lottery by preventing 

anyone from being able to submit counterfeit ballots. It also guar-

antees the conveners cannot accidentally double count any ballot.

Lot(s): the unit (units) of any selection criteria used to create a 

volunteer profile. Lots can take the form of a physical representa-

tion of selection criteria, such as a set of individual criteria paper 

cards, or a digital representation in the form of a list or grouping of 

table fields. Each card or field represents a portion of the criteria 

for the lottery. For instance, when randomly selecting a group of six 

people (three women and three men) from a hat, one would use 

three paper cards marked as “female” and three marked as “male” 

as lots. Using a spreadsheet program, one would create a list of 

three table fields (cells) marked as “female” and three marked as 

“male” used as lots. 

Participant, panelist: in this document, the terms “participant” 

and “panelist” refer to a person who is selected through a lottery.

Population definition: a numeric definition of population accord-

ing to proportionate selection criteria. For instance, if a population 

of 100 has 33 men and 67 women, the population definition con-

veners would need to select would be a group of 18 people with 6 

men and 12 women. The conveners would then use the definition 

to create the number of lots used for each criterion for the lottery.

Public: in this document, the noun “the public” refers to any group, 

membership, or community of people that is the target of a consul-

tation process. 

Recruitment: the activity of seeking volunteers or participants 

for a Civic Lottery or consultation process through marketing and 

outreach efforts, such as direct mail, advertising, etc. 

Resident, citizen, or member: in this document, the terms “resi-

dent,” “citizen,” or “member” refer to the smallest unit of “the public” 

— a person who is a potential participant of a consultation process.

Selection criteria: the factors or categories for representation in 

the lottery. These criteria are design choices that define the way in 

which the lottery proportionately represents the target population 

for the larger consultation process. The main criteria are self-identi-

fied gender, age, and where one lives (geography). The conveners 

may identify additional categories according to the problem or 

theme of the public consultation process, including: primary trans-

portation type for a consultation on transportation policy; whether 

one is a homeowner for a consultation on housing; or ethnographic 

categories to identify and ensure particular communities, including 

Indigenous peoples and visible minorities, are adequately repre-

sented.

Gender: the gender the respondent self-identifies with and not the 

medical sex of the respondent.

Validation: the process of reviewing the keycodes and other vol-

unteer information that has been submitted during recruitment to 

ensure the integrity of the lottery process. The conveners identify 

invalid submissions, including duplicate submissions, those with 

addresses that are outside of the designated area due to forward-

ed mail, those with missing or incorrectly filled-out information, or 

those with missing or incorrectly matching keycodes, and remove 

them from the lottery process. The conveners make efforts to 

clarify any missing information or possible mistakes made by the 

respondent prior to selection.

Volunteer, respondent, positive respondent, negative respon-

dent: A positive respondent is a member of the public who is both 

interested in and has submitted the information necessary for 

them to participate in the Civic Lottery process. By contrast, a neg-

ative respondent is a member of the public who is interested in the 

consultation, but has also indicated they are unable to participate 

in the Civic Lottery process and/or consultation process.

Volunteer profile: defines a complete set of randomly selected 

lots that represent a possible volunteer. For instance, in a lottery 

defined by three selection criteria (self-identified gender, age, and 

geographic area), three randomly selected lots (one for self-identi-

34

fied gender, one for age, and one for geographic area) constitute 

a complete volunteer profile. 

35

MASS LBP Reference Panels  
Selected by Civic Lottery

1.  Toronto Planning Review Panel (II) (10,000 

17.  BC Services Card User Panel on Digital 

packages mailed)

Services (16,500)

2.  Greater Toronto Airports Authority 

18.  Metrolinx Regional Residents’ Reference 

Residents’ Reference Panel on Airport 

Panel on Transportation Investment 

Growth (15,000)

(10,000)

3.  Metrolinx Residents’ Reference Panel on the 

19.  Ontario Ministry of Consumer Services 

Regional Transportation Plan (10,000)

Reference Panel on the Condominium Act 

4.  Duncan-North Cowichan Citizens’ Assembly 

(10,000)

on Municipal Amalgamation (10,000)

20.  Calgary Arts Development Citizens’ 

5.  Citizens’ Reference Panel on Pharmacare in 

Reference Panel (5,000)

Canada (10,000)

21.  Toronto Residents’ Reference Panel on 

6.  Lethbridge Citizens’ Assembly on Councillor 

Household Income (7,500)

Employment and Compensation (5,000)

22.  Citizens’ Reference Panel on Ontario Health 

7.  St. Michael’s Hospital: Residents’ Health 

Services Panel (14,500)

8.  St. Michael’s Hospital: Academic Family 

Health Team Patient Design Session (10,000 

emails)

9.  Toronto Planning Review Panel (I) (12,000)

10.  Calgary Commission on Municipal 

Infrastructure (10,000)

11.  The Citizens’ Reference Panel on the Mental 

Health Action Plan for Canada (10,000)

12.  Metrolinx Residents’ Reference Panel on 

the Davenport Community Rail Overpass 

(10,000)

13.  Halton Region Citizens’ Reference Panel on 

Strategic Priorities (II) (10,000)

14.  Grandview-Woodland Citizens’ Assembly 

(19,000)

15.  St. Joseph’s Health Centre Community 

Reference Panel (10,000)

16.  Residents’ Reference Panel on Supervised 

Injection Services (16,500)

Services (10,000)

23.  Toronto Community Housing Tenant 

Communications Strategy & Tenants’ 

Reference Panel (7,500)

24.  The Ottawa Hospital Patients’ Reference 

Panel on Clinical Services Transformation 

(15,000)

25.  Hamilton Citizens’ Reference Panel on 

Cultural Policy and Planning (5,000)

26.  Halton Region Citizens’ Reference Panel on 

Strategic Priorities (I) (7,500)

27.  Citizens’ Advisory Panel on Clinical Hospital 

Services Distribution Plan (5,000)

28.  Northumberland Hills Hospital Citizens’ 

Advisory Panel on Health Service 

Prioritization (5,000)

29.  Ontario Youth Matter Youth Advisory 

Council (5,000)

30.  Mississauga-Halton Local Health 

Integration Network Citizens’ Reference 

Panel on Regional Health Priorities (5,000)

36

31.  Central Local Health Integration Network 

Commissioned Civic Lotteries

Citizens’ Reference Panel on Regional 

1.  McMaster: Citizens’ Reference Panel on 

Health Priorities (5,000)

Health Technologies (3,500)

32.  South East Local Health Integration 

2.  BioBanking in British Columbia: A 

Network Citizens’ Reference Panel on 

Deliberative Public Consultation (5,000)

Regional Health Priorities (5,000)

3.  Explosives and the Environment in 

33.  South East Local Health Integration 

British Columbia: A Deliberative Public 

Network Citizens’ Regional Health Assembly 

Consultation (5,000)

(5,000)

4.  Prince Edward County Citizens’ Assembly 

(5,000)

37

Civic Lottery Invitiation Package: 

(Important message enclosed)

Toronto Planning Review Panel, 392a King Street East, Toronto, ON, M5A 1K9

E
O
_
o
t
n
o
r
o
T

Only 12,000 households in Toronto have been randomly selected to receive this invitation
We need you to volunteer for the City of Toronto’s new Planning Review Panel

Sanjay Smith
#2-143 York View Dr
Toronto, ON  M5A 1D3

Outer window envelope. (Size: No. 10)

Deadline
October 6
Respond Today

Return Address

Response required by:
Tuesday, October 6, 2015

Registering online ensures your 
response is received by the deadline

www.toronto.ca/planning/tprp

Return envelope. (Size: No. 9)

38

 
 
 
d
r
a
C
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
e
t
a
d
d
n
a
C

i

❏  YES, I would like to volunteer as a member of the Toronto Planning Review Panel
  ❏  No, I do not wish to volunteer on the Panel but I would like to receive further information

First name: 

 Last name: 

Gender:  Male  

   Female 

  Age:  18 – 29 

  30 – 44 

  45 – 64 

  65+

Primary Phone: 

 – 

 – 

  Secondary Phone: 

 – 

 – 

Email:   

Sanjay Smith
#2-143 York View Dr
Toronto, ON  M5A 1D3

XX123456

Volunteer by 
October 6

l

P
e
a
s
e
t
u
r
n
o
v
e
r

Å

Office use

Lottery Ballot — Front Side.

d
r
a
C
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
e
t
a
d
d
n
a
C

i

Please complete your candidate card by checking all that apply:
1) ❏ I own my home 
  ❏ Aboriginal 

  ❏ Visible Minority

  ❏ I rent my home

3) I am available to attend all four orientation sessions of the Panel:  ❏ Yes  ❏ No

October 17, 2015 

  October 31, 2015 

  November 14, 2015 

  November 28, 2015 

4) I am available to attend at least 10 of the 12 subsequent meetings of the Panel in 2016 and 2017.  
  Please refer to the enclosed Frequently Asked Questions sheet for the list of subsequent meeting dates.
  ❏ No, I’ve read the list of dates and cannot attend
  ❏ Yes, I’ve read the list of dates and can attend 

NOTICE OF COLLECTION: The personal information requested here is collected under the legal authority of the City 
of Toronto Act, S.O. 2006, Chapter 11, Schedule A, s.136 (b) & (c) and the Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, Chapter P.13.

Your personal information will be used for the purpose of forming the Toronto Planning Review panel and will not 
be shared with any other parties or for any other purpose than the creation of this panel. Questions about this 
collection can be directed to the Coordinator Stakeholder Engagement & Special Projects in the Office of the Chief 
Planner by calling 416-392-3812, or by e-mail at dfusca@toronto.ca.

Deadline
October 6
Respond Today

l

P
e
a
s
e
t
u
r
n
o
v
e
r

Å

Lottery Ballot — Back Side

39

 
 
 
   
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 4, 2015

Dear Toronto Resident,

The City’s Planning Division needs your help to make sure we are creating a city that is prosperous, 
livable, equitable, and environmentally responsible. 

This letter is a special invitation to apply to be part of the new Planning Review Panel, and 
to add your voice to Toronto’s planning process. If you are 18 years of age or older and live in 
Toronto, you can apply — no experience is necessary.

Whether you’re new to Toronto or a long-time resident, you know the city is changing fast.

New buildings and infrastructure are being constructed to meet the needs of the 20,000 net new 
residents who each year decide to make Toronto their home. This makes Toronto one of the fastest-
growing and most dynamic cities in North America.

The City’s Planning Division is responsible for ensuring that this growth enhances the city we share 
— from Steeles Avenue to the waterfront, and from Rouge River to Etobicoke Creek.

This means thinking about the long-term impacts of growth, while balancing the different interests, 
needs, and priorities of the city’s 2.8 million residents. We need your help to get this balance right. 

The Planning Review Panel is a new way for City Planning to hear the perspectives of Torontonians 
like you. As a member of the Panel, you will learn about your city and provide input and local 
expertise on important planning issues shaping Toronto. These issues could relate to transportation, 
zoning for new homes and businesses, neighbourhood density and character, historic buildings, and 
the locations of libraries, community centres, parks, and other neighbourhood amenities. 

Membership on the panel is open to any Toronto resident who receives this letter and is 18 years of 
age or older. From among the pool of applicants, 28 members will be randomly selected to ensure 
broad representation from across the city. You do not need to be a Canadian citizen, and there is no 
cost to participate.

The Planning Review Panel will meet six times each year, following a special orientation program 
this fall. Each member will serve on the Panel for two years.

Joining the Panel is a great way to:

•  Learn first-hand about your city and the planning process;

•  Contribute your perspective and learn about the views of other Toronto residents; and

•  Provide insight to the Planning Division concerning important issues shaping the city. 

You do not need to be an expert to participate. It’s your perspective as a Toronto resident that 
matters most. 

l

P
e
a
s
e
t
u
r
n
o
v
e
r

Å

Deadline
October 6
Respond Today

Invitation Letter — Front Side (Size: Letter)

40

 
 
 
Members of the Planning Review Panel will meet from 9:30 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. on the following Saturdays this 
fall. You must be able to attend each of the sessions, as well as 10 of 12 additional meetings that will occur over 
the next two years (see the Frequently Asked Questions sheet for further details). 

Saturday, October 17, 2015 

Saturday, November 14, 2015   

Saturday, October 31, 2015 

Saturday, November 28, 2015

To volunteer for the Planning Review Panel, please phone 1-844-711-8186, mail in the enclosed form, 
or register online at www.toronto.ca/planning/tprp by Tuesday, October 6, 2015.

I believe our City’s planning process will be strengthened by creating new ways for Torontonians to learn 
and contribute to the decisions that affect them.

Toronto is an exciting place to live, and it’s important that we all have a hand in shaping it. 

Whether you are new to Toronto or a long-time resident, I sincerely hope you will volunteer to serve on 
Toronto’s first Planning Review Panel.

Sincerely,

Jennifer Keesmaat

Chief Planner and Executive Director
Planning Division
City of Toronto

A MESSAGE FROM THE MAYOR OF TORONTO, JOHN TORY:  
“We are all passionate about the city we live in and want the best for Toronto. The City is looking at more and 
better ways of bringing you to the table when making decisions that affect you and your family. The Planning 
Review Panel is an excellent, thoughtful and direct way for you to give City Hall the advice we need to make 
good choices about the future of our city. Whether you just moved to the city or have lived here your entire life,  
I encourage you to volunteer. Let’s work together to turn a good city into a truly great one.”

How to register as a volunteer for the Toronto Planning Review Panel:

There are three quick and easy ways you can register: 

1.  Phone 1-844-711-8186 to register by phone (or ask questions about the selection process);
2.  Complete the enclosed Candidate Response Card and mail it back using the enclosed envelope; or
3.  Register securely online at www.toronto.ca/planning/tprp

Please ensure you register in one of the above ways by Tuesday, October 6, 2015. If you are selected for the 
Panel, you can expect a phone call on the evening of Wednesday, Oct 7, 2015. 

The Planning Review Panel will meet on the following dates between 9:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.: October 17 and 31, and 
November 14 and 28. You must be able to attend all of the sessions above and 10 of the 12 additional meetings held 
from January 23, 2016 to November 18, 2017 (see the Frequently Asked Questions sheet for further details). Please check 
and hold all dates until the evening of Wednesday, October 7, 2015, when the members of the Panel will be notified. 

If you are unable to participate, please encourage members of your household 18 years of age or older to volunteer.

Invitation Letter — Back Side. (Size: Letter)

41

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frequently Asked Questions
Frequently Asked Questions
Toronto Planning Review Panel
Toronto Planning Review Panel

What is a Planning Review Panel? 

A Planning Review Panel is a group of residents 
brought together to learn about, discuss, and provide 
input to City Planning staff on important city planning 
issues. Twenty-eight randomly selected Torontonians 
will be appointed to the Panel as volunteers for two 
years. The Panel will develop its input as a group and 
will work to reflect the interests of all Torontonians. 

What would be my role as a member of the 
Planning Review Panel?

Between October 2015 and November 2017, members 
of the Planning Review Panel will meet 16 times. As a 
member of the Panel you will:
•  Learn first-hand about the city and its planning 

process from independent experts as well as  
City staff;

•  Contribute your perspective and learn about the 

Why have a Planning Review Panel in Toronto?

views of others; and

Toronto is changing fast. Each year 20,000 net new 
residents make Toronto their home, and they all need 
places to live, work, and play. This means we need to 
build or upgrade new and existing buildings, public 
spaces and infrastructure to meet the city’s changing 
needs. The Planning Review Panel will be a new way 
for residents to share their perspectives on how best 
to direct this growth and change. The City of Toronto’s 
Planning Division believes the input of residents 
like you, and the expert knowledge you have about 
the communities you live in, is essential for good 
decision-making. The insights and local expertise of 
the Panel will complement other forms of community 
consultation and help to ensure that growth occurs in 
ways that reflect the values and priorities of Toronto’s 
residents.

But I am not an expert — can I still be involved?

Absolutely. We do not expect you to have any 
specialized knowledge about city planning. Your 
perspective and experience as a Toronto resident is 
what matters most. Each member will have enough 
time to learn everything they need to make an informed 
contribution to the Planning Review Panel.

What is the City of Toronto’s Planning Division? 

The City Planning Division provides advice to City 
Council that helps guide growth in neighbourhoods 
across Toronto. We shape how the city looks and 
feels, and develop plans that ensure residents can 
work, live, play, and move throughout the city. We 
review applications for new buildings; promote well-
designed streets, parks and open spaces; guide how 
buildings are located, organized, and shaped; plan 
transportation; work to transform Toronto’s waterfront; 
and undertake in-depth research used by other City 
Divisions on land use, housing, community services, 
and the environment.

•  Provide input to the Planning Division on important 

issues shaping the city.

The Planning Division will request input from the 
Planning Review Panel on issues such as transportation 
plans, the desired density and character of different 
neighbourhoods, the importance of historic buildings 
and public art, and the location of new community 
amenities like parks, libraries, and community centres. 

What will be done with the Panel’s input?

The Planning Review Panel is intended to be an 
influential body and an important source of input that 
will help the Planning Division provide effective advice 
to City Council. The panel’s perspectives, insights, and 
priorities will be referenced in reports to Council and 
published on the City of Toronto’s website.

How was I selected to receive this invitation?

Your address was one of 12,000 households across 
Toronto randomly selected by Canada Post to receive 
this invitation. 

Who is eligible to serve on the Planning  
Review Panel? 

To be a member of the Planning Review Panel you 
must be 18 years of age or older and a current resident 
of a household that received this letter. You do not 
need to be a Canadian citizen to participate. Only one 
volunteer per household will be eligible for membership 
on the Planning Review Panel. Employees of the City of 
Toronto, contractors working for the Planning Division, 
members of other official City of Toronto Advisory 
Bodies, as well as elected municipal, provincial, and 
federal officials are ineligible to serve as members of 
the Planning Review Panel.

l

P
e
a
s
e
t
u
r
n
o
v
e
r

Å

Deadline
October 6
Respond Today

Frequently Asked Questions Sheet — Front Side. (Size: Legal)

42

 
 
 
Can anyone from my household volunteer?

Yes. This invitation is transferable to anyone living in 
your household. If you are unavailable, please pass this 
invitation to any member of your household who is 18 
years of age or older. 

How will the members of the Planning Review 
Panel be selected?

Members will be chosen by randomly selecting names 
from among the pool of volunteers who respond to 
this letter — a process we call a Civic Lottery. We will 
make sure the panel is as diverse as Toronto itself, with 
equal representation of both men and women, as well 
as people of all ages, homeowners and renters, and 
people who identify as visible minorities. The Panel will 
also include at least one Aboriginal member.

How do I become a member of the Planning 
Review Panel? 

First, you must respond to this invitation no later than 
Tuesday, October 6, 2015. You can register over the 
phone at 1-844-711-8186, online at  
toronto.ca/planning/tprp or by using the enclosed 
prepaid envelope. Then, on Wednesday, October 7, 
2015, we will randomly select members of the Planning 
Review Panel from among those who have registered 
as volunteers. If you are selected, you will be notified by 
phone.

I am unsure whether I can attend all sixteen 
meetings, can I still volunteer?

It is very important that all members of the Planning 
Review Panel attend each meeting. We realize, 
however, that this is a significant commitment. At 
minimum, members must attend the four orientation 
sessions this fall, and ten of the twelve meetings in 
2016 and 2017. Please consider and confirm your ability 
to participate before volunteering. 

The four Saturday orientation sessions will run from 
9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on the following dates. You must 
be able to attend all four of these sessions: 

October 17, 2015 
October 31, 2015  

November 14, 2015 
November 28, 2015

The twelve additional meetings of the Planning Review 
Panel will run from 11:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on the 
following Saturdays. 

You must be able to attend, at minimum, ten of the 
twelve meetings:

2016 Meetings:
January 23, 2016
April 2, 2016
May 14, 2016
September 10, 2016
October 15, 2016
November 26, 2016

2017 Meetings:
January 14, 2017
March 4, 2017
April 22, 2017
June 10, 2017
September 16, 2017
November 18, 2017 

Will I get paid to serve on the Planning  
Review Panel? 

We are asking you to donate your time and volunteer 
as a member of the Panel. Lunches and snacks will 
be provided, and basic travel costs, including parking, 
will be reimbursed. Childcare and eldercare will be 
made available (or an equivalent subsidy) if requested. 
However, we do not provide an honorarium or any 
additional compensation. There is no cost to participate.

Will the Planning Review Panel have  
translation services? 

The Panel’s meetings will be in English and 
simultaneous translation will not be available. 

I have a physical disability. Can you assist me 
in participating?

If you would like to be a member of the Planning Review 
Panel, but are concerned about potential barriers 
to participating, please call 1-844-711-8186. We are 
committed to assisting all members of the Planning 
Review Panel so that they can participate successfully, 
and will do our best to accommodate your needs.

If I do not get chosen for the Planning Review 
Panel, can I still be involved in  
city government?

Absolutely. The City of Toronto hosts a variety of public 
consultations each year on a range of local and city-
wide subjects. A list of upcoming consultations can be 
found by visiting www.toronto.ca/involved and clicking 
on “Consultations.” 

How to register as a volunteer for the Toronto Planning Review Panel:

There are three quick and easy ways you can register: 

1.  Phone 1-844-711-8186 to register by phone (or ask questions about the selection process);
2.  Complete the enclosed Candidate Response Card and mail it back using the enclosed envelope; or
3.  Register securely online at www.toronto.ca/planning/tprp

Please ensure you register in one of the above ways by Tuesday, October 6, 2015. If you are selected for the 
Panel, you can expect a phone call on the evening of Wednesday, Oct 7, 2015. 

The Planning Review Panel will meet on the following dates between 9:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.: October 17 and 31, and 
November 14 and 28. You must be able to attend all of the sessions above and 10 of the 12 additional meetings held from 
January 23, 2016 to November 18, 2017 (see the Frequently Asked Questions sheet for further details). Please check and 
hold all dates until the evening of Wednesday, October 7, 2015, when the members of the Panel will be notified. 

If you are unable to participate, please encourage members of your household 18 years of age or older to volunteer.

Frequently Asked Questions Sheet — Back Side. (Size: Legal) 

43

 
 
 
 
 
Sources

G. E. Bolton, J. Brandts, and A. Ockenfels. Fair procedures: 

Evidence from games involving lotteries. The 
Economic Journal, 115(506):1054–1076, 2005.

T. G. Bouricius. Democracy through multi-body sortition: 
Athenian lessons for the modern day. Journal of 
Public Deliberation, 9(1), 2013.

J. Gastil and P. J. Weiser. The jury and democracy: how 
jury deliberation promotes civic engagement and 
political participation. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 2010.

J. J. Gobert. Justice, democracy, and the jury. Ashgate/

Dartmouth, Aldershot, 1997.

J. Carroll. The jury as democracy. Alabama Law Review, 

66:825, 2014.

M. H. Hansen. The tradition of the Athenian democracy 
AD 1750–1990. Greece & Rome, 39(1):14-30, 1992.

L. Carson. The Australian Citizens’ Parliament and the 

B. Hennig. New ways of looking at democracy. Board 

future of deliberative democracy. Rhetoric and 
democratic deliberation. Pennsylvania State 
University Press, University Park, Pa., 2013.

L. Carson and J. Hartz-Karp. Adapting and combining 
deliberative designs: Juries, polls, and forums. The 
deliberative democracy handbook: Strategies 
for effective civic engagement in the Twenty-First 
Century, pages 120–138, 2005.

Leadership, 2016(146):1–3, 2016.

I. R. Kaufman. A fair jury-the essence of justice. Judicature, 

51:88, 1967.

K. Kloby and M. J. D’Agostino. Citizen 2.0: public and 
governmental interaction through Web 2.0 
technologies. Information Science Reference, 
Hershey, PA, 2012.

C. Chwalisz. The people’s verdict: adding informed citizen 

voices to public decision-making.

A. A. Lockard. Decision by sortition: a means to reduce 
rent-seeking. Public Choice, 116(3):435–451, 2003.

S. Coleman, A. Przybylska, and Y. Sintomer. Deliberation 

A. Malkopoulou. The paradox of democratic selection: 

and democracy: innovative processes and institutions, 
vol. 3 of Warsaw studies in politics and society edited 
by Radoslaue Markowski. 1st ed.

Is sortition better than voting. Parliamentarism and 
Democratic Theory. Historical and Contemporary 
Perspectives. Opladen/Toronto: Barbara Budrich 
Publishers, pages 279–298, 2015.

A. Coote and J. Lenaghan. Citizens’ juries: Theory into 
practice. Institute for Public Policy Research, 1997.

G. Delannoi and O. Dowlen. Sortition: Theory and 
Practice, volume 3. Andrews UK Limited, 2016.

O. Dowlen. Sorting out sortition: A perspective on the 

random selection of political officers. Political Studies, 
57(2):298–315, 2009.

O. Dowlen. The political potential of sortition: A study 

of the random selection of citizens for public office, 
volume 4. Andrews UK Limited, 2017.

T. Nabatchi and J. Gastil. Democracy in motion: 

Evaluating the practice and impact of deliberative 
civic engagement. Oxford University Press, 2012.

O. Renn. Participatory processes for designing 

environmental policies. Land Use Policy, 23(1):34–43, 
2006.

O. Renn, T. Webler, and P. Wiedemann. The pursuit of fair 
and competent citizen participation. Fairness and 
competence in citizen participation, pages 339–367, 
1995.

A. W. Dzur. Punishment, participatory democracy, and the 

jury. Studies in penal theory and philosophy. Oxford 
University Press, New York, 2012.

O. Renn, T. Webler, and P. M. Wiedemann. Fairness and 
competence in citizen participation: Evaluating 
models for environmental discourse, volume 10. 
Springer Science & Business Media, 1995.

J. Gastil, E. P. Deess, P. J. Weiser, and C. Simmons. The 

jury and democracy: How jury deliberation promotes 
civic engagement and political participation. Oxford 
University Press, 2010.

S. W. Rosenberg. Deliberation, participation and 

democracy: Can the people govern? Palgrave 
Macmil- lan, Basingstke, 2007.

J. Gastil and P. Levine. The deliberative democracy 

handbook: Strategies for effective civic engagement 
in the twenty-first century. Jossey-Bass San Francisco, 
CA, 2005.

Y. Sintomer. Random selection, republican self-
government, and deliberative democracy. 
Constellations, 17(3):472–487, 2010.

[J. Gastil and P. J. Weiser. Jury service as an invitation 

to citizenship: Assessing the civic value of 
institutionalized deliberation. Policy Studies Journal, 
34(4):605–627, 2006.

G. Smith and C. Wales. Citizens’ juries and deliberative 
democracy. Political studies, 48(1):51–65, 2000.

P. Stone and D.-C. Welcome. Sortition and voting: A 

theoretical framework. Deepening Democracy, 2012.

44

Reference Re Provincial Electoral Boundaries (Sask.), 

K. Sutherland. What sortition can and cannot do. 2011.

[1991] 2 S.C.R. 158, (sub nom. Reference Re Electoral 
Boundaries Commission Act, ss. 14, 20 (Sask.)) 81 
D.L.R. (4th) 16 [hereinafter Reference Re Provincial 
Electoral Boundaries cited to S.C.R.].

J. D. Trout. Why empathy matters: The science and 
psychology of better judgment. Penguin, 2010.

A. Vergne. A brief survey of the literature of sortition. 

Sortition. Theory and practice, pages 69–87, 2010.

Did we miss anything? Please share it with us. 

chris@masslbp.com

45

 
—blank page—

GNU Free 
Documentation 
License

Version 1.3, 3 November 2008

Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free 
Software Foundation, Inc. <https://fsf.org/>

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim 
copies of this license document, but changing it is not 
allowed.

0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, 
or other functional and useful document “free” in the sense 
of freedom: to assure everyone the effective freedom to 
copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either 
commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License 
preserves for the author and publisher a way to get credit for 
their work, while not being considered responsible for modifi-
cations made by others.

This License is a kind of “copyleft”, which means that derivative 
works of the document must themselves be free in the same 
sense. It complements the GNU General Public License, which 
is a copyleft license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for man-
uals for free software, because free software needs free 
documentation: a free program should come with manuals 
providing the same freedoms that the software does. But this 
License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for 
any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it 
is published as a printed book. We recommend this License 
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medi-
um, that contains a notice placed by the copyright holder say-
ing it can be distributed under the terms of this License. Such 
a notice grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in 
duration, to use that work under the conditions stated herein. 
The “Document”, below, refers to any such manual or work. 
Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as 
“you”. You accept the license if you copy, modify or distribute 
the work in a way requiring permission under copyright law.

A “Modified Version” of the Document means any work 
containing the Document or a portion of it, either copied ver-
batim, or with modifications and/or translated into another 
language.

A “Secondary Section” is a named appendix or a front-matter 
47

section of the Document that deals exclusively with the rela-
tionship of the publishers or authors of the Document to the 
Document’s overall subject (or to related matters) and con-
tains nothing that could fall directly within that overall subject. 
(Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, 
a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The 
relationship could be a matter of historical connection with 
the subject or with related matters, or of legal, commercial, 
philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.

The “Invariant Sections” are certain Secondary Sections 
whose titles are designated, as being those of Invariant 
Sections, in the notice that says that the Document is released 
under this License. If a section does not fit the above defini-
tion of Secondary then it is not allowed to be designated as 
Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections. 
If the Document does not identify any Invariant Sections then 
there are none.

The “Cover Texts” are certain short passages of text that are 
listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice 
that says that the Document is released under this License. A 
Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover 
Text may be at most 25 words.

A “Transparent” copy of the Document means a ma-
chine-readable copy, represented in a format whose 
specification is available to the general public, that is suitable 
for revising the document straightforwardly with generic 
text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint 
programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing 
editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for 
automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input 
to text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent 
file format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been 
arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by 
readers is not Transparent. An image format is not Transpar-
ent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy that is 
not “Transparent” is called “Opaque”.

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include 
plain ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX 
input format, SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, 
and standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF 
designed for human modification. Examples of transparent 
image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats 
include proprietary formats that can be read and edited only 
by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the 
DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and 
the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by 
some word processors for output purposes only.

The “Title Page” means, for a printed book, the title page itself, 
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the 
material this License requires to appear in the title page. For 
works in formats which do not have any title page as such, 
“Title Page” means the text near the most prominent appear-
ance of the work’s title, preceding the beginning of the body 
of the text.

The “publisher” means any person or entity that distributes 

copies of the Document to the public.

A section “Entitled XYZ” means a named subunit of the 
Document whose title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ 
in parentheses following text that translates XYZ in another 
language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section name men-
tioned below, such as “Acknowledgements”, “Dedications”, 
“Endorsements”, or “History”.) To “Preserve the Title” of such a 
section when you modify the Document means that it remains 
a section “Entitled XYZ” according to this definition.

The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the 
notice which states that this License applies to the Document. 
These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by 
reference in this License, but only as regards disclaiming war-
ranties: any other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers 
may have is void and has no effect on the meaning of this 
License.

2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, 
either commercially or noncommercially, provided that this Li-
cense, the copyright notices, and the license notice saying this 
License applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, 
and that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of 
this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct 
or control the reading or further copying of the copies you 
make or distribute. However, you may accept compensation in 
exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough number 
of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated 
above, and you may publicly display copies.

3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that com-
monly have printed covers) of the Document, numbering 
more than 100, and the Document’s license notice requires 
Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that carry, 
clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on 
the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both 
covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the pub-
lisher of these copies. The front cover must present the full title 
with all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You 
may add other material on the covers in addition. Copying 
with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve 
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be 
treated as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to 
fit legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit 
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto 
adjacent pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document 
numbering more than 100, you must either include a ma-
chine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque 
copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a computer-net-
work location from which the general network-using public 

• 

48

has access to download using public-standard network 
protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, 
free of added material. If you use the latter option, you must 
take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin distribution 
of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent 
copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until at 
least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque 
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that 
edition to the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors 
of the Document well before redistributing any large number 
of copies, to give them a chance to provide you with an updat-
ed version of the Document.

4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the 
Document under the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, 
provided that you release the Modified Version under pre-
cisely this License, with the Modified Version filling the role of 
the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification 
of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In 
addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

•  A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title 
distinct from that of the Document, and from those of 
previous versions (which should, if there were any, be 
listed in the History section of the Document). You may 
use the same title as a previous version if the original 
publisher of that version gives permission.
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons 
or entities responsible for authorship of the modifications 
in the Modified Version, together with at least five of the 
principal authors of the Document (all of its principal 
authors, if it has fewer than five), unless they release you 
from this requirement.

• 

•  C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of 

the Modified Version, as the publisher.

•  D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
• 

E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifica-
tions adjacent to the other copyright notices.
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a 
license notice giving the public permission to use the 
Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the 
form shown in the Addendum below.

• 

•  G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant 
Sections and required Cover Texts given in the Docu-
ment’s license notice.

•  H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
• 

I. Preserve the section Entitled “History”, Preserve its Title, 
and add to it an item stating at least the title, year, new 
authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given 
on the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled “History” in 
the Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, 
and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, 
then add an item describing the Modified Version as 
stated in the previous sentence.
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Doc-
ument for public access to a Transparent copy of the Doc-

ument, and likewise the network locations given in the 
Document for previous versions it was based on. These 
may be placed in the “History” section. You may omit a 
network location for a work that was published at least 
four years before the Document itself, or if the original 
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
K. For any section Entitled “Acknowledgements” or “Ded-
ications”, Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve 
in the section all the substance and tone of each of the 
contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications 
given therein.
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, 
unaltered in their text and in their titles. Section numbers 
or the equivalent are not considered part of the section 
titles.

• 

• 

•  M. Delete any section Entitled “Endorsements”. Such a 

section may not be included in the Modified Version.

•  N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled 

“Endorsements” or to conflict in title with any Invariant 
Section.

•  O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or 
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain 
no material copied from the Document, you may at your 
option designate some or all of these sections as invariant. 
To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the 
Modified Version’s license notice. These titles must be distinct 
from any other section titles.

You may add a section Entitled “Endorsements”, provided it 
contains nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version 
by various parties—for example, statements of peer review or 
that the text has been approved by an organization as the 
authoritative definition of a standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover 
Text, and a passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to 
the end of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only 
one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text 
may be added by (or through arrangements made by) any 
one entity. If the Document already includes a cover text for 
the same cover, previously added by you or by arrangement 
made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of, you may 
not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit 
permission from the previous publisher that added the old 
one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this 
License give permission to use their names for publicity for or 
to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this 
License, and multiple identical Invariant Sections may be 
replaced with a single copy. If there are multiple Invariant 
Sections with the same name but different contents, make 
the title of each such section unique by adding at the end of 
it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher 
of that section if known, or else a unique number. Make the 
same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant 
Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled 
“History” in the various original documents, forming one sec-
tion Entitled “History”; likewise combine any sections Entitled 
“Acknowledgements”, and any sections Entitled “Dedications”. 
You must delete all sections Entitled “Endorsements”.

6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and 
other documents released under this License, and replace 
the individual copies of this License in the various documents 
with a single copy that is included in the collection, provided 
that you follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying of 
each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, 
and distribute it individually under this License, provided you 
insert a copy of this License into the extracted document, and 
follow this License in all other respects regarding verbatim 
copying of that document.

7. AGGREGATION WITH 
INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other 
separate and independent documents or works, in or on 
a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an 
“aggregate” if the copyright resulting from the compilation 
is not used to limit the legal rights of the compilation’s users 
beyond what the individual works permit. When the Docu-
ment is included in an aggregate, this License does not apply 
to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves 
derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to 
these copies of the Document, then if the Document is less 
than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document’s Cover 
Texts may be placed on covers that bracket the Document 
within the aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of covers 
if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise they must 
appear on printed covers that bracket the whole aggregate.

5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents 
released under this License, under the terms defined in section 
4 above for modified versions, provided that you include in the 
combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original 
documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections 
of your combined work in its license notice, and that you pre-
serve all their Warranty Disclaimers.

8. TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may 
distribute translations of the Document under the terms 
of section 4. Replacing Invariant Sections with translations 
requires special permission from their copyright holders, but 
you may include translations of some or all Invariant Sections 
in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. 
You may include a translation of this License, and all the 
license notices in the Document, and any Warranty Disclaim-

49

ers, provided that you also include the original English version 
of this License and the original versions of those notices and 
disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the trans-
lation and the original version of this License or a notice or 
disclaimer, the original version will prevail.

If a section in the Document is Entitled “Acknowledgements”, 
“Dedications”, or “History”, the requirement (section 4) to 
Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the 
actual title.

9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Doc-
ument except as expressly provided under this License. Any 
attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute it 
is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this 
License.

However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your 
license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a) 
provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly 
and finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the 
copyright holder fails to notify you of the violation by some 
reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.

Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is 
reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of 
the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time 
you have received notice of violation of this License (for any 
work) from that copyright holder, and you cure the violation 
prior to 30 days after your receipt of the notice.

Termination of your rights under this section does not termi-
nate the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights 
from you under this License. If your rights have been terminat-
ed and not permanently reinstated, receipt of a copy of some 
or all of the same material does not give you any rights to use 
it.

10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised 
versions of the GNU Free Documentation License from time 
to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present 
version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or 

concerns. See https://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version 
number. If the Document specifies that a particular numbered 
version of this License “or any later version” applies to it, you 
have the option of following the terms and conditions either 
of that specified version or of any later version that has been 
published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. 
If the Document does not specify a version number of this 
License, you may choose any version ever published (not as 
a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document 
specifies that a proxy can decide which future versions of this 
License can be used, that proxy’s public statement of accep-
tance of a version permanently authorizes you to choose that 
version for the Document.

11. RELICENSING
“Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site” (or “MMC Site”) 
means any World Wide Web server that publishes copyright-
able works and also provides prominent facilities for anybody 
to edit those works. A public wiki that anybody can edit is an 
example of such a server. A “Massive Multiauthor Collab-
oration” (or “MMC”) contained in the site means any set of 
copyrightable works thus published on the MMC site.

“CC-BY-SA” means the Creative Commons Attribution-Share 
Alike 3.0 license published by Creative Commons Corpo-
ration, a not-for-profit corporation with a principal place of 
business in San Francisco, California, as well as future copyleft 
versions of that license published by that same organization.

“Incorporate” means to publish or republish a Document, in 
whole or in part, as part of another Document.

An MMC is “eligible for relicensing” if it is licensed under this 
License, and if all works that were first published under this 
License somewhere other than this MMC, and subsequently 
incorporated in whole or in part into the MMC, (1) had no cov-
er texts or invariant sections, and (2) were thus incorporated 
prior to November 1, 2008.

The operator of an MMC Site may republish an MMC 
contained in the site under CC-BY-SA on the same site at any 
time before August 1, 2009, provided the MMC is eligible for 
relicensing.

50

How to run a Civic Lottery: 

Designing fair selection mechanisms 
for deliberative public processes

